WSJ Japanese
世界報道写真財団が選ぶ年間優秀作品; 　世界報道写真財団が選ぶ年間優秀作品が発表され、ロシアの駐トルコ大使が射殺された現場やシリア紛争の一場面をとらえた写真が選出された。南アフリカでサイの保護をする活動家の写真なども含まれた。受賞作品の一部を紹介する。

590 words
15 February 2017
00:12
ウォール・ストリート・ジャーナル日本版
WSJOJP
Japanese
Copyright 2017. Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Civilians escape from a fire at a house destroyed by an air attack in Luhanskaya village in Ukraine.

Two men panic and struggle in the water during their rescue. Their rubber boat was in distress and deflating quickly on one side, tipping many migrants in the water. They were quickly reached by rescue swimmers and brought to safety.

Adriana Cordeiro Soares, 30 years old, bathes her three-month-old son who was born with microcephaly caused by the Zika virus, in her house in the rural area of Sao Vicente do Serido, Brazil.

A view of the Quezon City Jail, one of the Philippines's most overcrowded prisons. Conditions are getting worse as police wage an unprecedented war on crime. There are 3,800 inmates at the jail, which was built six decades ago to house 800, and they engage in a relentless contest for space. Men take turns sleeping on the cracked cement floor of an open-air basketball court, the steps of staircases and underneath beds and hammocks made out of old blankets.

A bear skin is nailed to the outside of a house in Nizhnyaya, Russia. The bear apparently came to the village at night, ate the dogs and attacked people.

Mevlut Mert Altintas shouted after shooting Andrei Karlov, the Russian ambassador to Turkey, at an art gallery in Ankara, Turkey. The jury of the 60th annual photo contest chose this image by Associated Press Turkish photographer Burhan Ozbilici as the World Press Photo of the Year.

A barber shop in Old Havana, Cuba.

An ISIS fighter is violently pushed by Libyan fighters affiliated with the government in Tripoli who shout and threaten to lynch him. A few minutes later the fighter was found in the same place shot dead multiple times.

A woman holds her two-year-old nephew who was injured from a bomb blast in Kabul.

Muddy York Rugby Football Club plays against the Nashville Grizzlies during the semifinal of the Hoagland Shield at the Ted Rhodes Park in Nashville, Tennessee. Nashville beat Toronto 15-0.

Heavy rain came down as police operatives investigated an alley where 37-year-old Romeo Joel Torres Fontanilla was killed by two unidentified gunmen riding motorcycles in the early morning in Manila, Philippines.

Care for Wild Africa is a donor-run organization that specializes in caring for wounded animals in Nelspruit, South Africa. The group has taken in many rhinoceros orphans hurt in the poaching wars across South Africa. Pictured here is Lulah, whose mother was killed in Kruger National Park. When the rangers found Lulah she was estimated to be one month old.

Activist Ieshia Evans stood her ground while offering her hands for arrest as she is charged by riot police during a protest against police brutality outside the Baton Rouge Police Department in Louisiana.

Document WSJOJP0020170214ed2e002s1
