World
Lebanese President Michael Aoun Reaches Out to Saudi Arabia in Search of Aid; Effort comes as Lebanon grows closer to Tehran, which vies with Riyadh for Middle East influence

By Margherita Stancati 
777 words
11 January 2017
12:57
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

RIYADH, Saudi Arabia—ebanon's new Hezbollah-supported president is courting Saudi Arabia in an effort to restore billions in military aid, a delicate task as his country grows closer to Iran, the kingdom's main rival for Middle East power.

Michel Aoun's country has for years been a political battleground in the regional struggle between Iran, the backer of the Lebanese Shiite militant and political group Hezbollah, and Saudi Arabia, a supporter of the country's main Sunni bloc.

The ascendancy of Mr. Aoun, Hezbollah's main Christian ally, was a victory for the group—nd a sign of the waning influence in Lebanon of Saudi Arabia, which had opposed his candidacy.

Now, Mr. Aoun is reaching out to Riyadh in an effort to show that Lebanon hasn't fallen into Tehran's orbit. At stake for Beirut is around $3 billion worth of military aid that Saudi Arabia suspended last year  in February in retaliation for Hezbollah's dominance of Lebanese politics.

The Lebanese leader visited Saudi Arabia this week to meet King Salman, in his first foreign visit as president.

A top item on the agenda of Mr. Aoun's two-day trip, which ended Tuesday, was to persuade the Sunni kingdom to resume those payments, intended to purchase weapons and other equipment from France. Lebanon would also like Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies to lift a travel warning on the tiny Mediterranean country they issued last year.

"I am here to dispel ambiguities that arose, and carry affection and friendship for the Saudi people," Mr. Aoun told Saudi television channel Al Ekhbariya.

The Saudi government hasn't said whether it is considering restoring aid. Saudi officials didn't respond to requests for comment.

Securing such aid could help Lebanon contain the spillover from the war in neighboring Syria. Lebanon's army is battling extremists along the border affiliated with al Qaeda and Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"Lebanon's army is currently fighting ISIS on the Lebanese border, and it needs all the support it can get," said Lebanese lawmaker Alain Aoun, a nephew of the president.

French Foreign Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault last month told reporters in Beirut that with the formation of a new government "the conditions were favorable" for the resumption of aid. Mr. Aoun's victory ended a political stalemate that left the country without a president for more than two years.

As Riyadh became entangled with the wars in Yemen and Syria, where it backs opposite sides from Iran, Lebanon slid down the kingdom's list of priorities.

Frustrated by Hezbollah's elevation into the country's most powerful military and political force in recent years, Riyadh has punished Lebanon economically, instructing its deep-pocketed citizens to avoid traveling  to the country. Saudi Arabia's Gulf allies issued similar travel warnings.

But disengaging from Lebanon has come at a political cost.

The backing of Hezbollah—hich Saudi Arabia and the U.S. consider a terrorist organization—elped Mr. Aoun secure the votes he needed in parliament to be elected president.

Under established power-sharing agreements in Lebanon, the president is always a Maronite Christian, the prime minister is Sunni and the speaker of parliament a Shiite.

In a sign that Riyadh is reconsidering its stance, the kingdom at the last minute publicly threw its support behind Sunni politician Saad Hariri, a longtime ally, who became prime minister  as part of a deal with Mr. Aoun. Several high-level Saudi delegations have visited Lebanon in recent months.

Saudi Minister of State Thamer al-Sabhan, who has spearheaded the kingdom's re-engagement with Lebanon, said Saudi Arabia hopes to see a strong government contain the influence of Hezbollah and Iran.

"The presence of arms in the hands of Hezbollah threatens [the Lebanese people] directly and it is important for [them] to have the ability, through a strong state, to stop Hezbollah's hostile actions," he said in an interview after Mr. Aoun's election.

Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah last month said his party didn't oppose Mr. Aoun's outreach to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries. "We are facing a new era that will see new relations developing for the benefit of Lebanon with all countries, except for the enemy we all agree on," a reference to Israel, he said in a televised speech.

Noam Raydan in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com 

Document WSJO000020170111ed1b003jt
