Times Insider
A Pentagon Correspondent Keeps Sight of the Person Inside the Uniform

By HELENE COOPER 
818 words
30 July 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In the time that I’e been covering the American military, I have fought the urge to vomit during a catapult takeoff from an aircraft carrier in the Persian Gulf, convinced myself that I was dying of blood loss when the Humvee I was in was run over by a tank in Iraq, and battled nerves and stomach heaves from an ejection seat of a B-1 bomber, wondering what the heck I thought I was doing 27,000 feet in the air.

And yet I suspect that in years to come, when I am recounting what it was like to be a Pentagon correspondent, I will remember far more the combination of hurt and defiance in the voice of a transgender American service member when I asked him how it felt to wake up Wednesday morning to a tweet from President Trump that he was no longer welcome in this country’ all-volunteer military.

“o know your own commander in chief doesn’ support you is totally demoralizing,”avy Lt. Cmdr. Blake Dremann told me. Still, he said he would continue to serve until the Navy comes and “ells me to hang up my boots.”

As a Pentagon reporter, I am far more comfortable interviewing top military brass about Afghanistan policy and the fight against the Islamic State. Those interviews are conducted with generals who have multiple stars on their breastplates and who are usually adept at not divulging more than what they have decided they will tell a reporter. There can be a dispassionate nature to those interactions; we sometimes talk about precision-guided airstrikes against “ISIS targets”s if we are not talking about killing human beings before they can kill us.

Pentagon reporters don’ usually do feelings, and we certainly don’ spend a lot of time talking to service members —any of whom are skittish about speaking on the record to reporters anyway —bout their feelings on Defense Department policy. Often they will just spout the standard American military line, because they don’ want to get into trouble with their superiors. But the transgender story is different because at its heart, it is a story about how this country treats the men and women who volunteer to defend America from its foes. It is not my usual story about how many Islamic State fighters we took out yesterday or how many troops the country will send to Afghanistan.

Rather, it is a story about men and women and their gender identity —o personal that basic questions felt invasive. Because hanging over those questions —“re you in the process of transitioning?”—ere issues so fundamental to a person’ humanity that the very asking seemed a violation. I kept imagining what it would have been like covering the Civil Rights Movement and asking black people what it was like to be told they were not equal to white people. “ow did you feel, Ruby Bridges, when those people threw eggs at you as the U.S. Marshals escorted you to that elementary school in New Orleans?”

But that’ one of the things that makes the job of writing about the American military the best job in Washington. It is a complex window into a world that is populated by everyone under the sun: They’e all here, and in the ranks of the enlisted men and women is a mosaic that tells the story of the country they serve.

There was the African-American Army specialist from Georgia who was told that her kinky hair didn’ conform to Army grooming standards. There was the diminutive Army private from the Dominican Republic who couldn’ believe reporters went to cover the Iraq war unarmed. There was the 19-year-old Navy petty officer from Ethiopia who sat with me for hours, garbage bag at his feet, on the quarterdeck of a Navy cruiser in the Pacific, seasick.

All of them, like Commander Dremann, were volunteers. As a reporter often more preoccupied with the military buildup on the Korean Peninsula or the fight against the Shabab in Somalia or which American units will be stationed in Eastern Europe as a bulwark against Russian aggression in Ukraine, it can be so easy to lose sight of the people for the policy. You spend the bulk of your reporting time getting comments from officials or looking for the latest memo about whether the rules of engagement in Somalia have changed.

Then suddenly you’e talking to one of the 1.3 million people who signed up to defend their country, wrestling with how to portray the truth of their feelings while preserving their dignity and livelihoods.

A protest in Times Square against President Trump’ announcement barring transgender people from military service. | Justin Lane/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170730ed7u000ul
