World News: Sweden Attack Places Focus on Central Asia

By David Gauthier-Villars and Drew Hinshaw 
476 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

STOCKHOLM -- The Uzbek nationality of the suspected terrorist in a truck attack that killed four here has Western security officials focusing on the former Soviet states of Central Asia, a geopolitically knotty source of extremists.

Before Friday's rampage in which a man drove a truck into a crowd, nationals from the region were suspected to have attacked a nightclub and an airport in Turkey last year, as well as a subway in St. Petersburg, Russia, this month.

No group has claimed responsibility for the attack here in which two Swedes, one Briton and a Belgian were killed. Authorities said the suspect in custody is a 39-year-old Uzbek who had been wanted since Feb. 24 for failing to comply with a deportation order. Swedish police said the man, identified as Rakhmat Akilov by local media, had applied for residency in 2014. He had been investigated over signs of extremism last year, and had voiced sympathy online for radical groups.

His trajectory from residency applicant to man in hiding highlights the challenge in detecting and tracking radicals hailing from the landlocked region.

Thousands of fighters from Central Asia have rallied to violent groups in Iraq and Syria. Many don't travel directly to the Middle East but rather are recruited in Russia, Turkey or Europe by networks that prey on emigrants who fled their own politically repressive regimes.

"There's been an underappreciated amount of Central Asians who have fought with ISIS in Syria and, since the beginning of the Russian airstrikes last year, they have been either returning to Afghanistan or Turkey and, in some cases, now seem to be deploying to Europe," said Jacob Zenn, an analyst at the Jamestown Foundation in Washington.

European officials have been trying to coordinate efforts to deport migrants who have been denied residency.

The issue came into stark focus last year when a failed asylum seeker from Tunisia who had been on a watch list allegedly drove a truck into a crowd at a Christmas market in Berlin, leaving 12 dead.

In Sweden, where about 200,000 people applied for asylum in the past two years, police have been overwhelmed by a steep rise in the number of deportation orders referred to them by immigration authorities. Police said that in the first 10 months of 2016, nearly 70% of the 6,647 people who were to be deported couldn't be located.

Confronting radicalized individuals from Central Asia comes with particular complications for European nations because they have nettlesome relations with Turkey and Russia, the two nations with some of the best intelligence on the region.

---

Neanda Salvaterra in London, Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Margaret Coker in Istanbul contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170411ed4b0000w
