World News: World Watch

388 words
15 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

IRAQ

ISIS Attack in Mosul

Fails to Gain Ground

Islamic State fighters armed with machine guns and wearing suicide vests launched a counterattack against Iraqi government forces in western Mosul, police officials said, briefly retaking control of some city blocks before they were beaten back.

In the operation early Wednesday, at least 50 Islamic State fighters slipped from their positions in the Old City. The militants swept into the Dendan neighborhood and set houses on fire, sending plumes of black smoke into the sky in what police said was an attempt to hamper air support for Iraqi government forces on the ground.

Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led international coalition fighting Islamic State, said no ground had been lost to Islamic State in Wednesday's fighting. He didn't respond to questions whether smoke from the burning houses impaired efforts to provide coalition air support.

Since driving Islamic State from eastern Mosul in January, Iraqi forces have seized swaths of territory in the west of the city and largely bottled up the militants in a small area of the Old City.

-- Ben Kesling

---

SPAIN

Rajoy Survives

No-Confidence Vote

Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy survived a parliamentary vote of confidence Wednesday, but the two-day debate was an uncomfortable public airing of the corruption investigations that have dogged his party.

Spanish lawmakers rejected by 170 to 82 the no-confidence vote against Mr. Rajoy, who was re-elected prime minister at the end of October. "We're going to be able to keep working," Mr. Rajoy said after the vote.

As expected, the only votes in favor of ousting the prime minister came from far-left Podemos, the three-year-old party that called the no-confidence motion, and some other left-wing parties. Podemos proposed its leader, 38-year-old Pablo Iglesias, as the successor to the 62-year-old Mr. Rajoy.

The prime minister has been called to testify as a witness at a trial of party members on July 26 related to an investigation into an alleged party slush fund. He hasn't been accused of wrongdoing. Podemos's focus on alleged kickbacks has resonated in Spain, where corruption has been a top public concern for several years.

-- Jeannette Neumann

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170615ed6f0002l
