THE THREAD
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The 11.19.17 Issue

861 words
3 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RE: AIRSTRIKES

Azmat Khan and Anand Gopal wrote about their investigation into the drastic undercounting of civilian deaths in Iraq.

Thank you for this exceptional investigative journalism. I am not at all surprised by the conclusions. I am saddened and ashamed -- but again, not surprised -- that our military is negligent and unwilling to admit that these precision killing machines, drones, are only as precise as our faulty intelligence. The lies and obfuscation about the errors and damage are inexcusable. The foundation of the American presence in Iraq -- the mission to save Iraq from Saddam Hussein, the weapons of mass destruction -- is all lies. I oppose forces trying to re-establish a caliphate and the terror they rain upon their brothers and sisters.

I wish there was a real way for the United States to help those suffering under the terror of ISIS and other fundamentalists. But the U.S. government is doing its best to create new terrorists with our continued role in the wars and the damage we inflict on people. It astounds me that we learned so little from Vietnam that we have been waging war for almost two decades -- wars that are not winnable. Anne Wilson, San Diego

Kudos for this foray into the very real and very ugly side of continuous war. Perhaps it will provide some impetus to hold Congress accountable for their failure to repeal the Authorization for Use of Military Force.

This is the price of constant aerial bombardment, drone ''accuracy'' or not. The Joint Special Operations Command and other military entities have been on a rampage since Sept. 11, if for no other reason than to expend costly arms and munitions to justify their existence and the continual purchase of replacement arms.

The bottom line is that constant war is a moneymaker. Start with that idea as fact, and all military actions make perfect sense. Civilian lives are inconsequential collateral damage as long as the military/industrial/banking complex uses the A.U.M.F. as legal grounds to terrorize the U.S.-subjugated fiefs in their cross-hairs. Jonathan Harder, Killingworth, Conn.

This article shows a terrible, tragic outcome of the war in Iraq. The criticisms of the U.S.-led force are understandable. But I do wonder how much more could be done to reduce civilian deaths, and it's clear that during a war like this, there is no way to eliminate civilian deaths.

The airstrikes that kill civilians are often based on bad or outdated information. But in war, there will always be bad and outdated information. It isn't possible, even with all our vaunted technology, to be absolutely certain that an airstrike will not affect any civilians, or that a target has not moved elsewhere.

I just don't know what the alternative is. If the United States pulls out of this conflict, then the Iraqi government will be waging the war, and I would bet that civilian deaths would rise. Also ISIS would have an easier time establishing itself, facing a weaker enemy. Every time it seizes territory, civilian deaths there rise.

It's a horrible outcome, but I can't see much of a way around it. ISIS must be eliminated, and that will take combat. That combat will kill civilians, and so will ISIS. It's a terrible time to be in Iraq or Syria, hence the millions of refugees. And I can't see any good answer to the problems. Dan Stackhouse, New York City, on nytimes.com

RE: BARSTOOL

Jay Caspian Kang wrote about a new crowd of sports ''bros'' embracing Barstool Sports.

This article provides another example of what is becoming an all-too-common thing these days: A segment of the population comes together and has their tender insecurities justified and then exploited by a small group of people. If people can't enjoy sports and banter while exhibiting basic decency to others, then they should take a look in the mirror and ask themselves: ''Who's the problem here? Is it people who defend the dignity of others being taunted, or is it me?'' Gareth Matthews, Leawood, Kan.

Women are sports fans, too. We play sports. We watch sports. We buy lots of sport merchandise. We sign our kids up for sports.

A lot of us are really over the rape-culture endorsement, the casual racism and the fat jokes, and we will not take our clicks and our money to straight, white, ''rapey'' bro fests.

I don't want my son learning that this is a normal part of being a Massachusetts sports fan. The cheating and the poor sportsmanship are bad enough in New England. It has nothing to do with ''political correctness'' and everything to do with wanting to live in a society of decent human beings. Baseball Fan, Framingham, Mass., on nytimes.com

Send your thoughts to magazine@nytimes.com.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Illustrations by Giacomo Gambineri.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY GILES PRICE/INSTITUTE ILLUSTRATIONS) DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY GIACOMO GAMBINERI) 

Document NYTF000020171203edc30007u
