World; Europe
A Communist Icon Toppled in Ukraine Is Restored. In England.

By ZEPHIRA DAVIS 
1,090 words
6 August 2017
12:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANCHESTER, England —fter 147 years, Friedrich Engels is back in town. Statues of Engels, Karl Marx’ collaborator, may have been ripped down all over the former communist world, but he has returned here, to the city that made him famous.

His resurrection in Manchester, where he conducted research on the working class in the 1840s, is thanks to Phil Collins —he acclaimed artist who has made Engels the centerpiece of his most recent project, “eremony.”

“ started working on this theme about 10 years ago,”aid Mr. Collins, who was nominated for the Turner Prize for British visual arts in 2006. Immersing himself in the history of the Industrial Revolution and of socialism in Manchester, he stumbled upon a quote by a local civil servant, who raised the idea of transporting an Engels statue from Ukraine to Manchester.

Since most Soviet-era statues were removed from their pedestals and destroyed after 1989 —nd an Engels likeness was rather rarer than the ubiquitous Lenin —inding the statue was not easy. Mr. Collins traveled for about a year across Eastern Europe before finally finding his prize in an agricultural compound in a district that he said was once named after Engels in the Poltava region of eastern Ukraine.

The statue, 12 feet tall, had been cut in half and dumped. But on May 15, the halves were hauled onto a truck and sent on their way to Manchester. On its travels through Europe, captured on film, the truck stopped in Engels’ birthplace, Barmen, now part of the city of Wuppertal in northwestern Germany.

The Engels project was funded by the Manchester City Council and was featured recently as the closing event of the biennial Manchester International Festival of the arts. The statue was ceremonially welcomed in front of an art theater called HOME, as a high-spirited crowd gathered in the parking lot to watch the film. The singer Gruff Rhys performed “Communism’ Coming Home.”

“ngels changed the course of history,”aid Noel Callaghan, 45, a local resident.

The ceremony also marked the centennial of the 1917 Russian Revolution, which was inspired by the ideas of Marx and Engels in their “ommunist Manifesto”f 1848. And much of their analysis was based on Engels’ own masterwork, “he Condition of the Working Class in England,”ublished three years before.

In Manchester, Engels is still revered. Alexandra Prodan, a 27-year-old medical secretary from Romania who has been living in Manchester for eight years, said the problem with communism was not with Marxist theory per se. “n practice,”s. Prodan said, communist regimes “ecame totalitarian and oppressive.”

Mr. Callaghan agreed. “orrupt people,”e said, “hey corrupt things, don’ they?”

Ms. Prodan added: “ven in the countries where people were oppressed, people were looking out for each other in a way. There was still a feeling of togetherness against the regime. This is basically what Engels wrote about. You know, it’ about the people coming together.”

Manchester is still mourning after a terrorist attack in May. “e’e still conscious of it,”r. Callaghan said. But in some respects residents seem more united than ever. “ou saw people mobilizing and coming together,”s. Prodan said.

The newly erected statue is not the only tribute to Engels in the city. At the University of Salford, not far from where Engels worked at his family-owned mill, an innovative sculpture of Engels’ iconic beard, meant to be climbed, is intended, the university claims, “o inspire the next generation of artists, musicians and performers.”

The statue is now installed in the city center to grant Engels “fficial recognition,”r. Collins said. Of course, things have changed a bit since his day. The statue now stands among such temples of Western capitalism as a McDonald’ and a Hilton.

The festival’ artistic director, John McGrath, said he expected the statue’ new location to “nvite people to think and ignite debate.”n Mr. Collins’ words: “hat’ interesting about socialism is that it announces itself.”

Why Engels? To Mr. Collins, it’ all about contradictions, “he contradictions we all live in.”

“ngels ran his family’ factory,”nd yet he was dedicated to the emancipation of the working class, Mr. Collins said.

“e was a capitalist by day and a communist by night,”e added.

Like Engels, Mr. Collins suggested: “obody’ outside of a system. We’e all kind of bound to it.”e deemed Manchester to be home to “mportant movements connected with social justice and with resistance.”

Manchester retains a strong air of socialism. Not only did it elect a Labour member of Parliament in the recent general election, but 94 of the 96 city councilors are members of the Labour Party.

“e’e got lots of statues for other 19th-century figures,”aid the leader of the Manchester City Council, Richard Leese. “hy not give one to a German Manchester socialist?”

It was hard to find a dissenting voice at the dedication of the statue. When asked about possibly glorifying a figure whose life’ work came to be associated with political regimes that ended up immiserating countless millions of people, Mr. Callaghan said that was not the point.

“ don’ think we’e necessarily celebrating it,”e said. “ith time, you’e got to acknowledge what happened in the past, don’ you?”

Barbara Woods, 70, who had accompanied her husband to the event, was practically alone in mildly criticizing the idea. “e are for the working class,”he said. “ut I’ not 100 percent sure about a statue.

“ersonally, I don’ see any need for it,”he continued. “ think we should let things lie and rather have a statue of somebody representing the region, not somebody who’ come from somewhere else.”

She suggested another influential part-time Mancunian, who worked at The Manchester Evening News for three years: “hy not George Orwell?”

* Terror Alert in Britain Is Raised to Maximum as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Manchester Attack

* For Manchester, as for Its Libyans, a Test of Faith

A statue of Friedrich Engels in Manchester, England, where he conducted research in the 1840s. The British artist Phil Collins had the statue trucked from Ukraine. | Joel Fildes, via Shady Lane Productions | Mr. Collins found the statue at an agricultural compound in eastern Ukraine. It had been cut in half and dumped. | Yevgen Nikiforov, via Shady Lane Productions 

Document NYTFEED020170806ed860018h
