National Desk; SECTA
Protesters in Durham Topple a Confederate Monument

By MAGGIE ASTOR 
569 words
15 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
18
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Chanting ''No K.K.K., no fascist U.S.A.,'' the protesters slung a rope around the Confederate soldier's neck and pulled.

The crowd stepped back, out of the way, and the soldier came crashing to the ground in a heap of crumpled metal.

From Charlottesville, Va., to New Orleans, officials have removed or considered removing Confederate monuments, to sometimes-violent backlash. But in Durham, N.C., on Monday night, opponents of the relics took matters into their own hands.

Shortly after 7 p.m., the protesters -- part of a group of more than 100 that included anti-fascists and members of organizations like the Democratic Socialists of America, the Workers World Party and the Industrial Workers of the World, according to The News & Observer of Raleigh -- toppled a statue of a Confederate soldier that had stood in front of the old Durham County Courthouse for nearly a century above the inscription, ''In memory of the boys who wore the gray.''

The figure fell headfirst, still attached to a piece of its pedestal, and the crowd -- men and women, black and white, mostly young -- erupted in whoops and cheers. Some protesters ran over and began kicking the statue. Others took photos beside it.

The Durham Police Department said in a statement that it had made no arrests because the episode had occurred on county property, which is under the jurisdiction of the Durham County Sheriff's Office. Members of the sheriff's office filmed the protest as the statue came down, The News & Observer reported, but the office did not respond to a request for comment on Monday night, and it was not clear whether its officers had made any arrests.

Gov. Roy Cooper, a Democrat, wrote on Twitter, ''The racism and deadly violence in Charlottesville is unacceptable, but there is a better way to remove these monuments.''

The do-it-yourself removal prompted strong reactions on social media, with many expressions of support but also at least one person who likened it to the Islamic State's destruction of historical artifacts.

How are protestors tearing down a Civil War statue in Durham, NC any different than ISIS destroying historic relics and museums? -- Margaret P.Smith (@Meggypaul) August 15, 2017

Taking down Confederate monuments is not erasing history - it's declaring that some parts of history belong in a museum, not on a pedestal. -- Caroline O. (@RVAwonk) August 15, 2017

The 15-foot monument, depicting an armed, uniformed Confederate soldier, was dedicated in 1924, six decades after the Civil War.

About two and a half hours after the statue was toppled, Charlie Reece, a member of the Durham City Council, posted screenshots on Twitter of an email exchange between him and a resident.

''Please consider removing the Confederate statue in downtown Durham,'' the resident, whose name Mr. Reece redacted, wrote at 6:20 p.m.

''With respect,'' Mr. Reece replied at 9:32, ''I don't believe there is a Confederate statue in downtown Durham any longer.''

Follow Maggie Astor on Twitter: @MaggieAstor.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

A statue of a Confederate soldier, which had stood for nearly a century, was brought down outside the old Durham County Courthouse in North Carolina on Monday night. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KATE MEDLEY/REUTERS) 

Document NYTF000020170815ed8f0005x
