Cross Country: Detroit's Iraqi Christians Could Use Some Mercy From Washington

By Jillian Kay Melchior 
841 words
24 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Dreams have been haunting Haydar Butris. From his prison bed in Youngstown, Ohio, the 39-year-old has envisioned the Islamic State hacking his body with knives and beheading him. But waking doesn't end his nightmare. Barring a legal miracle, Mr. Butris will soon be deported to his native Iraq, a country he hasn't seen since he was a teenager.

On June 11, Immigration and Customs Enforcement agents detained 114 Iraqi nationals. Like Mr. Butris, the vast majority are Chaldean Christians who came to the U.S. legally, then committed a crime that made them eligible for deportation. But if they're remanded to Iraq, they fear their faith could get them killed.

"We're sending people back to a country their families fled from, and at all possible times, that's the worst place to go," says Mr. Butris's lawyer, Clarence Dass, who also represents 19 other Chaldeans. "This could be a death sentence."

The Chaldeans' plight is a particular challenge for the Trump administration, which has positioned itself as a defender of Middle Eastern Christians. But it could also pose a problem for progressives, who have long insisted religion must not be a factor in immigration policy.

The administration has depicted the Detroit deportations as a critical safety measure. Immigration officials have said that the "overwhelming majority" of those being sent back to Iraq committed serious crimes, including murder, rape and kidnapping. The Detroit News reported this week that one of them, Louis Akrawi, is "a convicted murderer who was known to police as the 'Godfather of the Chaldean Mafia,'" and two others were his associates.

But in many cases, Iraqi Christians committed nonviolent crimes decades ago, in the folly of youth. Mr. Butris was put on probation after delivering seven pounds of weed in 1998. In another case, a mother of three was convicted for misdemeanor fraud 14 years ago. Neither has been charged with a crime since.

Until this year, the Iraqi government refused to take back immigrants, buying time for Chaldeans with criminal records. During that period, many have settled down, married their sweethearts, started businesses, and gotten involved in the church.

Mr. Butris has two daughters, 12 and 9, and a 3-year-old son. All born in America. "His kids, they're devastated," Mr. Butris's brother, Marty Mansor, says. "They keep asking when their dad is going to come back. I don't know what to tell them."

The harsh truth: Deporting these Detroit Chaldeans to Iraq inherently exposes them to peril and persecution. Last month, Vice President Mike Pence accused Islamic State of carrying out genocide against Christians. "Our administration is fully committed in bringing relief and comfort to believers not only across the Middle East but across the world," Mr. Pence said.

And it's not just ISIS that threatens Iraqi Chaldeans. Last month, a cleric who oversees the government's Shia endowment fund publicly said Christians must convert to Islam and pay a tax "or else they are killed." And just before Christmas, gunmen shot up Christian-owned shops in Baghdad, killing several people.

A famed Baghdad vicar has since bemoaned that his faith will soon be extinct in his homeland. In 2003, roughly 1.5 million Christians lived in Iraq. Four-fifths of them have fled abroad.

Progressives claim the Constitution bars the government from basing immigration and deportation decisions on religion. Yet so far it's been mainly progressives arguing for a reprieve for Detroit's Chaldeans, for whom "the risk is because of their religion," said William Swor, another Michigan attorney representing several Iraqi Christians.

But if the Trump administration considers religion a factor for these Iraqi Christians, why shouldn't it do so for those affected by the so-called travel ban? And in that case, why not give Middle Eastern Christians priority over Muslims who are also seeking refugee status? The potential repercussions grow broad because U.S. law doesn't allow much discretion when it comes to the deportation of immigrants who have committed crimes.

The Iraqi Chaldeans have three basic options: They can apply for relief under the U.N. Convention Against Torture, under which religious persecution can be a consideration; they can seek pardons for their original crimes; or, in some cases, they can ask for a reprieve based on "exceptional and extreme hardship" for their citizen spouses or children.

In all three cases, the burden of proof is on the immigrant facing deportation. These near-immutable strictures constitute a harsh irony for Chaldeans, who may soon face persecution for adhering to a faith grounded in redemption.

Both the Trump administration and its progressive opponents may find themselves yearning for a legal way to allow mercy to season justice. Otherwise, the case of the Iraqi Chaldeans is likely to have thorny implications, whether they stay or go.

---

Ms. Melchior is Heat Street's political editor.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170624ed6o0001m
