NEWS ANALYSIS
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Showdown Expected in the Euphrates Valley, but It's Complicated

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT 
1,197 words
1 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Islamic State fighters are expected to make their last stand in a series of Euphrates River Valley towns and villages that American-backed Syrian and Iraqi forces are not expected to attack for months, American officials said Thursday.

Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the leader of the extremists' self-styled caliphate, is believed to be hiding in the area, which stretches from Deir ez-Zor in Syria to Rawah in Iraq. So are the Islamic State cells that are responsible for planning attacks abroad, and were likely tied to Abdelbaki Essati, the shadowy imam who the authorities believe was at the center of the August terrorist attacks in Barcelona, Spain.

American military officials were quick to congratulate the Iraqi forces on their surprisingly swift victory in the northwest town of Tal Afar this week. But the seizure of that town is not seen by United States military commanders as an indication that the next phase of the campaign against the extremist fighters will be easy or quick.

Instead, the operation will need to deal with a complex array of political and military problems as American officials and their allies try to deliver the knockout blow against the militants. They must first ensure that American-backed fighters do not collide with converging Syrian government forces backed by Russia and Iran and Shiite militias supported by Tehran.

''The final stand of ISIS will be in the Middle Euphrates River Valley,'' Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, the top commander of the American-led task force that is battling the militants in Iraq and Syria, told reporters on Thursday as he wound up his one-year assignment in Baghdad. ''All these forces will converge there.''

A year and a half ago, the Pentagon had a simple way to describe the American strategy to collapse the Islamic State's caliphate. The group's military, economic and political power centers were based in Raqqa, Syria, and Mosul, Iraq -- both of which needed to be taken back.

''That's why our campaign plan's map has got big arrows pointing at both Mosul and Raqqa,'' Ashton B. Carter, who served as President Barack Obama's secretary of defense, told reporters during a visit to Fort Campbell, Ky., in January 2016.

But the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL, appeared to have anticipated the loss of both cities. It has since moved its most important administrative functions, including operatives in charge of recruiting, financing and plotting external attacks, into the Euphrates River Valley.

While the resistance by foreign fighters in Raqqa has been fierce -- roughly half the city has been retaken and the hardest combat may lie ahead -- the city no longer functions as the capital of the caliphate.

Instead, the militants are operating from Syrian towns like Mayadin and Abu Kamal and Iraqi towns like Al Qaim -- all Sunni enclaves where the militants enjoy support, and where the American-backed campaign has no ground forces, at least not yet.

Operations in the Euphrates River area, which straddle the Syrian and Iraqi border, will be more complex than the battle for Tal Afar, which was surrounded for months by Iraqi forces.

''We're planning for tough fights ahead,'' General Townsend said.

The Syrian Democratic Forces, which are backed by the United States, are largely led by Syrian Kurds who may not be immediately acceptable to the local Arab populations. The Syrian Kurds provide most of the essential command-and-control for the overall fighting force, half of which is Arab.

But as they move into the Euphrates River Valley, the Syrian forces now are expected to recruit additional local Arabs as well other Arab fighters who have been trained by American and allied forces at al-Tanf, a desert outpost in southern Syria near the intersection of the Jordanian and Iraqi borders.

The Arab fighters from al-Tanf are vetted and supported with small arms, navigation tools and medical supplies. American and other allied advisers also provide basic combat training skills, including first aid, marksmanship and techniques on how to clear a house of militants.

American commanders remain worried about ensuring ''de-confliction'': avoiding potential clashes between United States-supported troops that are battling the Islamic State and eastward-moving Syrian forces that are backed by Moscow and Tehran with Shiite militias supported by Iran.

''We want to avoid inadvertent clashes,'' General Townsend said. ''It gets even tougher when you have a force that may be something other than friendly -- not necessarily an adversary, but something other than friendly -- and you don't have great communications with them, and you don't have an agreed-upon plan.''

It is not a hypothetical risk. American warplanes have already shot down a Syrian jet and two Iranian-made drones, and have mounted airstrikes against forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad that appeared to menace American-backed Syrian fighters.

The United States military is not in contact with Mr. Assad's forces, but it is in daily discussions with Russian forces, including through a telephone line from General Townsend's headquarters in Baghdad to the Russian military in Syria.

Officials said American and Russian commanders had discussed making the Euphrates River a dividing line between Syrian government forces and those backed by the United States. But Russia has also suggested that Syrian forces should be able to operate north of the river in some areas, and the arrangements have not yet been settled.

''We've already established the measures that are in place that go down into the MERV a ways,'' General Townsend said, using a military abbreviation for the Middle Euphrates River Valley. ''When the time comes, we'll work out other measures in the future that will cover the entire area that needs to be covered.''

Tensions between the Assad government and the American military, however, have underscored the limits of the Russian influence and, thus, the potential difficulty of completing such arrangements.

The tensions escalated after Syrian authorities allowed buses of Islamic State fighters and their relatives to move from Syria's western border toward the country's east, where they hoped to link up with militants in Abu Kamal.

''The Syrian regime appears to be quite happy to deliver them right to Abu Kamal on the Iraqi border,'' General Townsend said. ''I know the government of Iraq doesn't appreciate that much, and we don't appreciate it.''

American warplanes have bombed the road to block the convoy and attacked Islamic State fighters from the town who were trying to reach it. As a result, the convoy was forced back into government-controlled areas of Syria.

For all the success that the United States has had in working out understandings with the Russians to avoid inadvertent clashes near Raqqa, the hotlines between the American and Russian commanders have been of little use in the episode with the convoy.

''We have communicated with the Russians, and I think that the Russians are basically telling us that that's not their activity, and they're not responsible for that,'' General Townsend said.

Document NYTF000020170901ed9100045
