Briefing
Tax Plan, Michael Flynn, Ivanka Trump: Your Wednesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,168 words
26 April 2017
11:35
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•ax plan puts business first.

President Trump plans to unveil a tax blueprint today that would apply a vastly reduced, 15 percent rate to a wide array of businesses, including his own. But it may omit a contentious border tax on imports.

Markets rose on the news, but our economics reporters caution that it is too soon to say if the administration can deliver on its promises.

Part of the inspiration for the president’ plan was a sketch on a white cloth napkin in 1974.

•ow was your Tuesday?

It was a busy one for the administration:

•resident Trump dropped his demand for immediate funds for a border wall, easing the passage of a spending bill by Friday to avert a government shutdown.

•ichael Flynn, the former national security adviser, may have violated the law by not disclosing his business dealings with Russia, top lawmakers from both parties said.

• federal judge blocked the administration’ efforts to cut funds for “anctuary cities.”

•nd the president made an unequivocal statement of support for Israel at an annual Holocaust remembrance ceremony and promised to “onfront anti-Semitism.”

•itnessing a battle against ISIS.

Michael Gordon, a military correspondent for The Times, is on the front lines in Iraq, where the fight to retake western Mosul from the Islamic State continues.

He guides us through a city where the plight of thousands of civilians appears to be worsening by the day.

•orries beyond water.

If anxieties over tainted water in Flint, Mich., have eased, other problems remain.

Our reporter visited one block in the city and found people struggling with entrenched poverty and violence.

“ feel like Flint is falling,”ne resident said. “t just keeps on falling.”

•enn Station nightmare.

After two derailments, Amtrak is considering closing tracks at the station in Manhattan for an extended period to make repairs.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we look at the man behind Uber, for better or worse.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•ore trouble at Fox News: Eleven current and former employees have filed a class-action lawsuit against the network, alleging racial discrimination and expanding on a complaint filed in March.

A Fox News spokeswoman denied the allegations, which came less than a week after the ouster of the network’ star host Bill O’eilly.

•early half of the largest U.S. corporations have set their own targets for emissions reductions, even as the Trump administration retreats from environmental commitments.

In the U.S., there are more than two jobs in the solar industry for each job in coal.

•espite the turmoil that has engulfed Wells Fargo in the past year, shareholders voted, tepidly, to keep all of the bank’ 15 directors.

• debt crisis in one town in China has raised fears of wider problems across the country.

•he Nasdaqpassed 6,000 for the first time on Tuesday, and other U.S. indexes were also up. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•ne of the keys to success at work is taking time off.

•ecipe of the day: Eggs, chorizo and asparagus are a good option for any time of day.

Noteworthy

•“hat happened in this place is beyond our imagination.”

In today’ 360 video, we visit Auschwitz, where a major construction project is underway to preserve the memory of the Holocaust.

•mbrace your failures.

That’ the ethos of a museum that will open in Sweden in June.

In a collection that offers insight into the “isky business of innovation,”he Museum of Failure will showcase products that flopped, such as Harley-Davidson fragrance, Bic pens for women, and Coca-Cola Blak, a coffee-inspired drink.

•he spirit of Selena.

Fans of Selena Quintanilla-Péez, the Tejano singer who was murdered in 1995 at 23, have never stopped celebrating her life.

A photographer captured portraits of fans at a gathering in Los Angeles.

•amiliar fare in a new setting.

Our restaurant critic reviews Union Square Cafe, which tries to replicate the original mainstay at a new location in Gramercy Park.

•est of late-night TV.

The hosts had a lot to say after Ivanka Trump defended her father’ treatment of women and called him a “remendous champion”f families.

Back Story

Last weekend, protesters marched in defense of scientific inquiry, spurred by a president who casts doubt on climate change.

They might have been pleased by today’ tale, of a government that turned to a citizen-scientist for answers.

On this day in 1803, a shower of 2,000 to 3,000 meteorites fell on L’igle, France. The French Academy of Sciences sent Jean-Baptiste Biot, a physicist, to assess the origin of the debris.

Mr. Biot concluded that the meteorites didn’ resemble anything on Earth and, considering accounts of “a rain of stones thrown by the meteor,”ad to be from outer space.

He thus established the field of study called meteoritics. (Meteorology, the study of the atmosphere and its phenomena, was already claimed.)

Four years later, a meteor and its debris were seen in Connecticut, and two Yale scientists concluded they had come from space. President Thomas Jefferson greeted their findings with caution, however.

(A remark widely attributed to him on the matter is most likely apocryphal: that it was “asier to believe that two Yankee professors could lie than to admit that stones could fall from heaven.”

It wasn’ until later in the 19th century that meteorites’xtraterrestrial origins became widely accepted as scientific fact.

Thomas Lotito contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Top lawmakers from both parties have said that Michael Flynn, President Trump’ former national security adviser, may have broken the law. | Drew Angerer/Getty Images | Officials at Amtrak, which owns and operates Penn Station, say the infrastructure at the terminal urgently needs an overhaul. | Todd Heisler/The New York Times | Natalia Loya, 16, at the fourth annual Selena Fan Gathering in Los Angeles. | Emily Berl for The New York Times | Panna cotta at Union Square Cafe, where our restaurant critic experienced more than a dash of déàu. | Francesco Sapienza for The New York Times | The March for Science in Washington on Saturday. | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | Nazi Germany’ largest death camp is under construction in order to preserve the memory of the Holocaust. | By STEFANIA ROUSSELLE, VEDA SHASTRI and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170426ed4q00209
