NATO's Vital Role in the War on Terror

By Jens Stoltenberg 
780 words
25 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A19
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

At first glance, it's simply a fragment of twisted metal outside the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's new headquarters in Brussels. But this 6-foot-long section of steel girder was recovered from the ruins of the World Trade Center. At its official unveiling Thursday, we will hail the artifact as a symbol of solidarity: Europe and North America standing together.

Two years ago I spoke at the 9/11 Memorial in New York. Being there, at the site of the attacks, reinforced my firm belief that however much terrorists try to divide us, they will only succeed in uniting us.

This is exactly what happened after 9/11. For the first time ever, NATO allies invoked our collective defense clause, Article 5. We recognized those shocking assaults on the U.S. as an attack against us all.

In the days that followed, NATO planes patrolled American skies. Within weeks, troops from NATO allies deployed to Afghanistan to ensure that country would never again be a haven for international terrorists. The biggest combat operation in NATO history was launched in direct response to the 9/11 terrorist attacks.

Since then, hundreds of thousands of Europeans, Canadians and troops from partner countries have stood shoulder-to-shoulder with their American comrades in Afghanistan. More than 1,000 have paid the ultimate price. Many more have suffered life-changing injuries.

At this moment, approximately 13,000 troops from 39 NATO and partner countries are training Afghan security forces to stabilize the country. And at a meeting of NATO leaders in Brussels on Thursday we will discuss how we can step up our fight against terrorism.

We never said it would be easy. On my visits to Afghanistan, I have witnessed the challenges, as well as the progress made. I was particularly impressed by my meeting with young Afghan women training to become pilots. I heard them express pride in what they are doing and appreciation for NATO's support.

While NATO's contribution to the fight against terrorism effectively began in Afghanistan, it now extends far wider.

NATO surveillance planes are supporting the coalition to defeat the so-called Islamic State. Iraqi troops trained by NATO to defuse improvised explosive devices are putting their skills to use in the battle for Mosul. We have taught soldiers counterterrorism and counterinsurgency tactics in countries like Egypt, Jordan, Mauritania and Morocco. And our highly skilled troops are helping Tunisia develop its own special forces.

Earlier this year, we opened a regional center in Kuwait to enhance cooperation with our Gulf partners. We are also developing a new operational hub at our command in Naples, Italy, to improve our ability to anticipate and respond to crises in the region. At our headquarters in Brussels we have set up a new intelligence and security division to improve our understanding of the threats we face.

At the same time, we are strengthening ties with the European Union and United Nations. Both organizations' counterterrorism capabilities complement our own. And we are working hard throughout the alliance to make our societies more resilient to attack.

While I am very proud of what NATO is already doing in the fight against terrorism, I also believe NATO can do more. For instance, we have learned from our experiences in Afghanistan and elsewhere that training local forces is one of the best weapons we have in the fight against terrorism. It is far better, and more sustainable, to help our neighbors to stabilize their countries themselves. And if our neighbors are more stable, we are more secure. These efforts must be expanded.

There are other possibilities. Although NATO has assisted the coalition fighting ISIS, it does not have a formal role. Having one would allow NATO to support political discussions in the coalition. It would also improve coordination, for example, with training and capacity-building activities. It would not mean NATO involvement in combat operations.

We are also considering expanding our support to airspace surveillance for the coalition. An expanded training and capacity-building role for NATO's special forces and the creation of a dedicated counterterrorism intelligence cell are also under consideration.

Terrorism affects every NATO ally. It is a long-term threat to our values, freedom and way of life. And the alliance is ready to do more to counter this threat. The unique bond between Europe and North America has delivered unprecedented peace for almost seven decades, and NATO's role in the fight against terrorism is an important chapter in that story.

---

Mr. Stoltenberg is secretary-general of NATO.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170525ed5p0000g
