The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Last Shot to Leave  ISIS 

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
652 words
23 February 2017
11:49
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

“his is your last opportunity to quit your work with ISIS.”hat was the message on leaflets dropped from planes in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul this week. “tay at home, raising the white flag as the forces approach.”

Rukmini Callimachi, a reporter for The New York Times, is there in Iraq, where United States-backed government forces are preparing to mount the second stage of their assault on the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

If they regain control of the western half of the city, they’l reunite Mosul and liberate a city that sits at the heart of the Islamic State’ power and its mission.

Rukmini spoke with me last night from her hotel in Iraq about what she’ seeing in Mosul and what this fight means for the future of the Islamic State.

On today’ episode:

•he biggest Islamic State stronghold in Iraq seems on the verge of falling to United States-backed forces. We go into the streets to see if a major victory over the militant group is really at hand.

•hy the smartest minds in finance cannot predict the Trump effect on stock prices.

Background reading:

•Rukmini Callimachi reports from Iraq about the next chapter of the offensive to drive the Islamic State out of Mosul.

•athaniel Popper’ story on the inconsistent science of predicting the market based on President Trump’ tweets.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’ enough, we can even text.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called “odcasts” it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, director of operations.

Messages dropped from planes in Iraq urge Iraqis to stay home and raise “he white flag”s the Islamic State forces approach. | Martyn Aim/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170223ed2n002s1
