World; Europe
Assailant Near Louvre Is Shot by French Soldier

By ALISSA J. RUBIN and AURELIEN BREEDEN 
1,329 words
3 February 2017
11:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS — man armed with two large knives and shouting “od is great”n Arabic lunged at a military patrol near an entrance to the Louvre on Friday, causing little harm, but rattling a city already on edge over terrorist attacks and casting another shadow over its international image.

A soldier opened fire, hitting the attacker several times, but not before he slashed at one of the other soldiers, causing minor injuries.

The Paris prosecutor, Françis Molins, said the attacker, who was 29 years old, was believed to be an Egyptian who arrived in France on Jan. 26 from Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates, on a visa he obtained last November.

The intervention by soldiers from the 1er Réiment de Chasseurs Parachutistes, an airborne unit based in Pamiers, in southwestern France, “nded a terrorist attack and enabled the arrest of its perpetrator, who by all indications was very determined,”r. Molins said.

The assault took place on a stairway leading down to the Carrousel du Louvre, an underground shopping mall that lies between the subway station closest to the museum and one of the museum’ entrances.

The attack was so close to the Louvre that it lit up social media networks. Within a couple hours of the assault, President Trump wrote on Twitter that the man was a “adical Islamic terrorist,”lthough the French authorities said it was too early to establish whether he had ties to any terrorist groups.

Mr. Molins, who is known for sticking to the facts, refrained from saying anything about the man’ motivations, but said that his passport had two visas to Turkey, in 2015 and 2016, and that he also had a visa for Saudi Arabia. He had a residency document for the United Arab Emirates.

Mr. Molins did not say where the man might have traveled in Turkey. Until recently, a stretch of the eastern Turkish border with Syria was highly porous, and many people slipped into territory held by the Islamic State in Syria’ northeast.

The man was not known to the French security authorities, but he was identified through fingerprints and a photograph taken when he obtained his visa, Mr. Molins said.

The suspect had rented an apartment for one week, paying about $1,830, in a well-heeled neighborhood just four subway stops from the Louvre. Two days after arriving in Paris, he bought two military-grade 16-inch knives at an arms store in central Paris for about $730, according to the authorities.

France has suffered more terrorist attacks and attempted attacks in recent years than any other country in Europe, and security officials believe that the country and especially its police and military forces, remain a target of choice for Islamic extremists.

Some of those attacks involve knives and were carried out by people who say they were inspired by the example of the Islamic State even if they had never traveled to Syria or Iraq or sworn allegiance to the organization. Mr. Molins noted that Friday’ attack occurred exactly two years after a similar attack on soldiers in Nice.

In just the past 13 months, there have been at least four attacks in France using knives, including one instance in which an off-duty police officer and wife were stabbed to death by a man who then filmed himself claiming allegiance to the Islamic State, broadcasting the video on Facebook.

In St.-Éienne-du-Rouvray, a small town in Normandy, a 19-year-old man slit the throat of an elderly priest as he was saying Mass last July. The young man and an accomplice, who were fatally shot by the police, had proclaimed allegiance to the Islamic State just before the murder.

Then there were the shocking assaults that claimed many more lives. On July 14, a man driving a truck plowed into a crowd celebrating Bastille Day in the southern city of Nice, killing 86 people. And on Nov. 13, 2015, three attacks carried out by 10 Islamic State terrorists in and around Paris took the lives of 130 people.

Although the Louvre attack was swiftly contained and involved only one assailant, it was likely to add to the woes of the museum and the city, where the number of visitors declined significantly in 2016 because of successive terrorist attacks and attempted attacks. The number of visitors to the Louvre was down 15 percent from 2015, and the number of foreign visitors fell, notably from Russia, Japan, China and Brazil.

Friday’ attack also coincided with the city’ final presentation of its bid for the 2024 Olympic Games, casting something of a pall over a day that Paris officials had hoped would not be associated with terrorism.

Still, the quick response by the military was likely to ease criticism about the expense and efficacy of using soldiers alongside the police to fight terrorism.

When terrorists carried out a massacre at the Bataclan concert hall during the November 2015 attacks, soldiers were nearby but were not under orders to act and were unable to aid the police, raising questions about their usefulness. While the situation on Friday was different —he soldiers were acting in self-defense —t was described repeatedly by politicians and senior government officials as a display of preparedness and “ang-froid.”

About 10,000 soldiers are deployed throughout France, with 3,500 in the Paris region alone.

Many people were also impressed by the calm efficiency displayed by the staffs of both the museum and the Carrousel du Louvre.

The museum had several rooms designated as secure places, and guards escorted visitors to those areas.

Bastien Lopez, 21, an intern at the museum, said he was at work when “ll of a sudden we saw a huge flow of people coming in the museum, and the people in charge of the security shut down the three main access doors.”

“hen they asked us to follow an itinerary that led us into a specific room,”e said, “here we stayed confined for two hours and a half.”e stayed in one of the rooms of the department of Islamic art, in the museum’ basement, with a few hundred people.

“t wasn’ a rush: Everything went very smoothly,”r. Lopez added. “e were not piled up; we could all sit on the floor. Some people took a nap.”

“he tourists reacted super well. The security persons were given instructions that we translated in English and in Chinese.”

Thomas, a 21-year-old who declined to give his surname, said he was doing maintenance work on electronic screens in the underground mall when he heard gunfire nearby.

He suspected an attack, yet his first reaction was not fear, but a “urvival instinct,”ueled by a “urge of adrenaline,”e recalled as he stood near a police cordon a few hours later.

“ followed the protocol, which was to leave through the emergency exits, since we were in one of the stores,”e said. “ evacuated, and I took two people with me.”

The lock down is over, but we are only allowed to go out. pic.twitter.com/XCWZYYoeUT —H (@nonenoone3) February 3, 2017

Follow Aurelien Breeden @aurelienbrd and Alissa J. Rubin @Alissanyt on Twitter.Elian Peltier contributed reporting from Paris, and Hannah Olivennes from London.

* French Terrorism Suspects Appeared Anything But

* A Third of Nice Truck Attack’ Dead Were Muslim, Group Says

* Paris Attacks Suspect Killed in Shootout Had Plotted Terror for 11 Months

* In Rise of \b ISIS\b0 , No Single Missed Key but Many Strands of Blame

* Fighting Terrorism, French-Style

Officers secured the area around the Louvre on Friday. | Christian Hartmann/Reuters | French soldiers shot and wounded an assailant carrying a blade and bags after he lunged at one of them in the underground shopping area at the museum in Paris. | By CAMILLA SCHICK 

Document NYTFEED020170203ed23003e9
