REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
This Time, Terror Hits Spain

318 words
18 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A14
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Recent terror attacks in Europe have been concentrated in the north, but Thursday's assault in Barcelona shows that the danger continues elsewhere. One or more attackers drove a van into a crowd, and officials say at least 12 people were killed and dozens injured. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

The attack occurred on Las Ramblas, a pedestrian boulevard popular with tourists in the height of Europe's vacation season. Terrorists have learned that vehicles can be effective weapons. Trucks killed 86 in Nice, France, and 12 in Berlin in 2016, and cars and vans were used in deadly sprees in London and Paris. ISIS offers a how-to manual online for this type of attack.

Spain last suffered a major attack in 2004, when al Qaeda killed 191 on commuter trains in Madrid. Al Qaeda was trying to punish Spain for joining America's coalition in the Iraq war and to sway an election. But Spain remains an Islamist target no matter its foreign policy. The Iberian peninsula was under Islamic rule for centuries, and extremists want to reconquer it.

They lack the military means to do so, but an internet connection is the only tool ISIS needs to radicalize individuals or small groups. Defeating ISIS in Syria and Iraq will diminish the group's claim to success and thus its power to inspire. But authorities warn that it could take a generation or more for extremism to burn itself out in the West. Governments in Europe will have to accelerate their crackdown on funding for extremist preaching and increase support for deradicalization.

Europe has also come late to the use of big data, tighter border checks and other counterterror techniques. The dangers are continental, not national, and authorities across Europe have to better coordinate their efforts to protect their public squares from mass murder.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170818ed8i00019
