World; Europe
Syrian Activist and Her Daughter Are Fatally Stabbed in Turkey

By CARLOTTA GALL 
975 words
22 September 2017
23:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

ISTANBUL — Syrian activist and her daughter, a journalist, have been found murdered in their apartment in Istanbul, family and friends reported on social media Friday.

The activist, Orouba Barakat, 60, and her daughter, Halla Barakat, 22, were discovered Thursday night in Uskudar, on the Asian side of the city. The news was first announced on social media by Shaza Barakat, the elder Ms. Barakat’ sister. The two women had been stabbed to death, the Turkish news agency Anadalou reported, quoting a police official.

The Barakats came from a large family known for its long opposition to President Bashar al-Assad of Syria and his predecessor and father, Hafez al-Assad. The two women were both active in the Syrian refugee community in Turkey.

The elder Ms. Barakat was a member of the opposition Syrian National Council, now known as the Syrian National Coalition, but she had also criticized some members of the opposition. Halla Barakat was an editor for Orient TV, which covers events in the Middle East, and had also worked for the Turkish Radio and Television Corporation.

While there was no official confirmation of the circumstances of the deaths, friends and relatives said the Assad government was to blame.

“hey assassinated them in a foreign land,”haza Barakat wrote on Facebook. “or 40 years her headlines occupied front pages. She sought out criminals and exposed them. And today, her name and Halla’ name are on the front page.”

The two women “ere vocal activists in the Syrian revolution, speaking truth to power, and raising awareness about the atrocities committed by the Assad regime,”nother relative, Suzanne Barakat, wrote on Facebook.

In a statement, the Syrian National Coalition said, “he hand of terrorism and tyranny is the prime suspect in this heinous crime of assassination.”

Social media posts on pro-government sites contained hateful comments about the Barakats.

But the Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet published details that indicated a similarity to killings committed by the Islamic State. The women’ throats had been cut, and they had received a threat on social media 10 days earlier from someone speaking in a Tunisian dialect, the newspaper reported.

The Islamic State has claimed responsibility for four previous killings of Syrian journalists in Turkey. A fifth has survived two attacks.

The elder Ms. Barakat had received threats in the days before her killing but had disregarded them, her brother, Maen Barakat, 56, said in a telephone interview.

“ince threats by the regime have become a common thing, she didn’ pay much attention to them,”r. Barakat said.

“o items were stolen from the apartment, which suggests that the crime was committed only to kill Orouba and Halla,”e added.

His sister was a born activist, he said. “he dedicated her life to give voice to the voiceless, until the Syrian regime exiled her in the ’0s,”e said. “ut still she continued to defend her rights and the rights of others.”

She set up a media and advertising business in Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and after the Syrian uprising moved to Istanbul.

“he came to Turkey to be closer to her country, hoping that once the war ends she would be able to return to her homeland,”r. Barakat said. “alla joined her mom in her fight against the Syrian regime, and became a loud voice in defending the rights of Syrians and documenting the crimes against them.”

Halla Barakat “as beautiful and lovely, smart and ambitious, and so kindhearted,”aid Jamal Mano, a Syrian journalist who worked for 10 months with her in Istanbul.

A Syrian refugee in Germany, Nour Sheikh Ibrahim, wept as he remembered the kindness the elder Ms. Barkat had shown him when he defected from the Syrian Army and escaped to Turkey.

“he was everything in my life, she was like my aunt,”r. Ibrahim said when reached by telephone. “he helped me a lot.”

Jobless and penniless, he had appealed to Ms. Barakat for help and when she opened a sewing factory she offered him a job. “he used to help refugees, and the camps,”e said. “he was very active. She helped lot of Syrians with money, even those who didn’ deserve it.”ater in Istanbul she gave him a place to stay.

They remained in touch, talking every few days, and he said Ms. Barakat had become depressed recently. “n the past few weeks Orouba was feeling so down,”e said. “ asked her to leave Turkey but she said she couldn’.”he lacked a valid passport, he added.

“ remember she used to receive a lot of threats on her phone,”r. Ibrahim said.

Suzanne Barakat also recalled how, in a tragic twist of fate, three members of the extended family —er brother, Deah Barakat, and his wife and her sister, who were studying in the United States —ere shot dead in Chapel Hill, N.C., in 2015 in a case that authorities investigated as a possible hate crime.

“umbness,”he said on Facebook, describing her feelings about the family’ latest deaths. “onfusion. Shock. Disbelief. I can’ think straight.”

Hwaida Saad contributed reporting from Beirut, Lebanon, and Karam Shoumali from Istanbul.

Correction: September 25, 2017, Monday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misidentified Suzanne Barakat’ relationship to the 2015 shooting victim Deah Barakat. He was her brother, not her cousin.

* \b ISIS\b0  Is Said to Have Killed 2 Activists in Turkey

* Syrian Journalist Who Documented \b ISIS\b0  Atrocities Is Killed in Turkey

* In Chapel Hill, Suspect’ Rage Went Beyond a Parking Dispute

Halla Barakat and her mother, Orouba, were found stabbed to death, relatives and a Turkish news agency said. | ABC News 

Document NYTFEED020170922ed9m008sp
