Politics
Battle Over Neil Gorsuch Supreme Court Confirmation to Hit Senate Floor; Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has votes to limit debate, which could lead to ‘uclear option'

By Byron Tau 
780 words
4 April 2017
23:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Republicans have 59 votes, at most, to end debate on Judge Neil Gorsuch's nomination, given that 41 senators have said they would vote "no" on a procedural motion to advance the nomination. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated that Republicans have 50 votes at most. (April 4, 2017)

WASHINGTON—he Senate is barreling toward a bitter showdown over the confirmation of Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch, as Republican Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday he has enough votes to change the Senate rules and eliminate the filibuster on Supreme Court nominations.

Mr. McConnell, a Kentucky Republican, was set to launch the procedural fight over Senate rules by filing for "cloture" Tuesday evening— procedural tool used to wrap up Senate debate and move toward a final vote.

Republicans are expected to fall short of the 60 votes needed to end debate, however, and are likely to lean on a change in Senate rules to confirm Judge Gorsuch, President Donald Trump's nominee to fill the Supreme Court vacancy created by the death last year of Justice Antonin Scalia. The rule change will likely happen on Thursday.

Such a change would permanently eliminate the filibuster, a stalling tactic used by a legislative minority, on presidential nominees. Democrats eliminated the procedure for executive-branch nominees and lower-court judges in 2013 in response to what they said was GOP obstruction preventing confirmation of former President Barack Obama's nominees.

Republican leaders this week said they had the votes to do the same with Supreme Court nominees after Democrats successfully cobbled together enough votes to sustain a filibuster of Judge Gorsuch.

"We're moving forward with the Gorsuch nomination for the Supreme Court," Mr. McConnell told reporters Tuesday. "It appears as if cloture will not be invoked, but we'll find out on Thursday. But either way, we'll be moving toward confirming Judge Gorsuch on Friday."

Asked if he had the votes to change the Senate rules on Supreme Court nominees, Mr. McConnell said, "Yes."

Democrats have portrayed their stance against Judge Gorsuch, who sits on the federal 10th Circuit Court of Appeals, as a matter of principle. Democratic senators have raised concerns about his rulings, his judicial philosophy and his stance on corporate political speech.

"Every time in the history of this country that a Supreme Court nominee has failed to earn the necessary votes to pass the Senate, the answer has been to change the nominee, not the rules," said Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.). "We believe that is exactly what should happen now."

Underlying the Democrats' arguments is continuing anger that Republicans last year refused to consider Mr. Obama's nominee for the same Supreme Court vacancy, Circuit Court Chief Judge Merrick Garland. Mr. Garland was nominated in March 2016, and Republicans argued that the next president should be able to fill the slot.

Institutionalists on both sides have expressed their dismay about the state of the Senate, once known for its collegiality and its preference for giving the party in the minority extensive input on legislation and nominees. But few senators see a way out of the showdown.

"I find it ironic and sad that we're going to change the rules over somebody that's lived such a good life, who's been such a good judge for such a long time," Sen. Lindsey Graham (R.,S.C.) said this week. "It says more about the Senate than it does Judge Gorsuch."

Mr. Graham was the only Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee to vote for Mr. Obama's nominees to the Supreme Court, Justices Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan.

Democrats agreed on the damage likely caused by this fight. "This fallout will be dangerously and perhaps disastrously radioactive for the Senate in years to come," said Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D., Conn.).

Mr. Blumenthal, who is joining the filibuster against Mr. Gorsuch, added, "To eliminate the 60-vote threshold will be a disaster not only for the United States Senate but for the court itself, because it will drag it into the muck and mire of partisanship that has been so repugnant to the majority of American people."

Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Administration Considers Far-Reaching Steps for ‘xtreme Vetting'

* Democrats Say Window for Bipartisan Action Is Closing

* What Is the Senate's ‘uclear Option'?

* Trump Administration Reopens H-1B Program, With a Twist

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy

* Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner's Rent in Washington: $15,000 a Month

* Jerry Seib:A New Tribalism Spreads in Trump's Washington

* Trump Gains With Rural Supporters, Slips With Military Communities

Document WSJO000020170404ed44001s1
