Editorial
Opinion
The Devastation of Nimrud

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
410 words
8 January 2017
23:42
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The marauding forces of \b ISIS\b0  were finally driven last November from Nimrud, Iraq’ priceless trove of Middle East history and relics situated south of Mosul. They left behind a barbaric pile of rubble after more than a year of systematically tearing apart the ancient palaces, temples and cultural treasures of what had been the capital of the Assyrian empire nearly three millenniums ago.

With ISIS gone, looters have now descended on the broken remains, gleaning the scorched earth for valuable fragments. No one is protecting the ancient grounds, despite a warning from United Nations inspectors that looters are further obliterating one of the most important archaeological sites of Mesopotamia.

Nimrud is not alone: The terrorists’ommitment to stamping out history and creating a fanatical caliphate has destroyed dozens of other irreplaceable sites.

In Nimrud, ISIS leaders proudly made a high-definition, seven-minute video of their organized attacks by jackhammer, bulldozer and dynamite on a civilization dating to 879 B.C. The city was leveled right up to its 140-foot-high ziggurat, a sacred stepped tower now reduced to bricks and dust. Looters pick among what remains along a 900-acre swath of devastation —ragments of ancient reliefs, chunks of cuneiform texts and pieces of statues, according to an Associated Press report.

The prime casualties of ISIS’ rampage across Syria and Iraq are the thousands of innocent lives destroyed. But to them must be added the priceless heritage of one of the world’ earliest empires. Previous excavations in the last century revealed hundreds of cuneiform tablets describing ancient treaties and palace life, and stores of jewels and gold in royal tombs.

ISIS propagandists maintain their mission will continue as relentless destroyers of the region’ “dols.”“henever we take control of a piece of land, we remove the symbols of polytheism and spread monotheism in it,” jihadi declared to the video camera in Nimrud, after which a massive detonation leveled the palace of King Ashurnasirpal II of Assyria —hich, until ISIS, had managed to stand since the ninth century B.C., despite repeated bouts of warfare.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

* The Crimes of Palmyra

A stone tablet last month amid the damage wrought by the Islamic State group at the ancient site of Nimrud, Iraq. | Maya Alleruzzo/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170108ed18003s5
