World News: World Watch

788 words
23 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SPAIN

Barcelona Suspects

Appear in Court

Four men accused of being members of an Islamist cell behind a van attack that killed 13 people in Barcelona last week appeared in court on Tuesday, a day after the alleged driver was shot dead by police.

The four, the only ones still alive among the 12 men thought to constitute the group, were brought from Barcelona to Marid and arrived at the High Court, which deals with terrorism cases, in a convoy of police vehicles with sirens wailing.

Police on Monday shot dead 22-year-old Younes Abouyaaqoub, whom they had identified as the driver of the van that careered along the packed Las Ramblas boulevard in Barcelona on Thursday, leaving a trail of 13 dead and 120 injured from 34 countries.

After the attack, Abouyaaqoub escaped on foot, stabbing to death a man who was parking his car and fleeing in the vehicle.

Spanish newspaper La Vanguardia said on Tuesday he walked some 40 kilometers from Sant Just Desvern, a town on the outskirts of Barcelona where he ditched the hijacked car, to Subirats, where he was shot dead.

Abouyaaqoub, who had changed clothes, walked by night and hid during the day, the paper said, citing sources involved in the investigation.

Carlos Mundo, the top justice official in the Catalan government, said police were investigating whether Abouyaaqoub had any support while on the run. "It is clear that he must have had some form of logistics," he told Catalonia Radio.

-- Reuters

---

BRAZIL

Prosecutors Charge

Ex-Corporate Chiefs

Prosecutors leading Brazil's largest-ever corruption probe on Tuesday filed criminal charges against the former chief executive of two of the country's largest state-run firms.

Aldemir Bendine, who was at the helm of state-run oil giant Petroleo Brasileiro SA. between 2015 and 2016, and at state-owned bank Banco do Brasil before then, has been charged with corruption, money laundering and obstruction of justice.

Prosecutors say that Mr. Bendine received bribes from construction giant Odebrecht SA. He has been under arrest since late July for his alleged role in the graft scheme.

Through his lawyer, Mr. Bendine has denied wrongdoing. The former CEO has said that he never solicited or received any bribes.

Marcelo Odebrecht, former CEO of Odebrecht, is also in prison after admitting to prosecutors that the firm paid hundreds of millions of dollars in bribes to government officials in many countries to secure contracts in Brazil and elsewhere.

-- Luciana Magalhaes

---

IRAQ

Mattis Says ISIS

Is 'On the Run'

U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said Tuesday he is confident U.S.-backed Iraqi forces will finish off the Islamic State militants clinging to strongholds that are shrinking in size and number.

"ISIS is on the run," Mr. Mattis said after meeting with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and other Iraqi government leaders. "They have been shown to be unable to stand up to our team in combat."

Mr. Mattis spoke alongside Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, the top U.S. commander in Iraq, who is due to finish his tour of duty here in early September.

"The fighting is tough," Townsend said, "but the momentum is with our partners."

With Iraqi troops on Tuesday reaching the first urban areas of the IS-held northern town of Tal Afar on the third day of an operation, Mattis has refused to predict victory. He said generals and senior officials should "just go silent" when troops are entering battle.

-- Associated Press

---

ECONOMY

Mexico Reports

Strong Growth

Mexico chalked up its 16th consecutive quarter of economic growth in the April-to-June period as strong services output compensated for sluggish industrial production.

Gross domestic product, a measure of output in goods and services, expanded 0.6% seasonally adjusted from the first quarter and was up 1.8% from a year before, the National Statistics Institute said Tuesday.

Growth from the first quarter, which translates into an annualized rate of 2.3%, was in line with the preliminary estimate published last month, but marked a slowdown from the 2.7% annualized growth in the previous quarter.

Increased employment, despite the impact of rising inflation on wages, has supported services that led growth in the second quarter, while industrial production was flat.

Services growth has averaged about 3.4% since the beginning of 2015, and could hold around that rate in the foreseeable future given the recovery in the labor market, said Marco Oviedo, head of Latin American research at Barclays.

The weakness in industry is mainly related to the public sector, Mr. Oviedo said. "They have been delivering on fiscal goals, but at a cost to growth."

-- Anthony Harrup

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170822ed8n00019
