Houses of Worship
A Suicide Bomber and the Sufi Soul

By Iman Malik 
797 words
3 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Thousands of worshipers were gathered at a prominent Sufi shrine in Sehwan, Pakistan, last month when a suicide bomb ripped through the courtyard, killing more than 80. As a counterterrorism analyst, I had long expected that something terrible would happen at the site -- the mausoleum of Hazrat Lal Shahbaz Qalandar, revered as a Sufi saint. And I wasn't surprised that an Islamic State affiliate quickly claimed responsibility for the bombing. But as a human and a Muslim who practices Sufism, it wrenched my heart.

Many Westerners today associate Islam with the doctrinaire tradition of Salafi jihadism, embodied by organizations like ISIS and al Qaeda. Yet Islam is so far from monolithic that sectarian differences often lead to violence and hatred among Muslims. Islamic State attacked the shrine precisely because of its importance to adherents of Sufism.

Sufism is an esoteric, mystical dimension of Islam whose adherents focus on maintaining a direct, personal relationship with God. It isn't a sect. Rather, Sufism is an approach to understanding Islam. Sufis seek conciliation, rather than confrontation, among all religions. They can be found throughout the world, and Sufism is apolitical. Its adherents are on a quest not for temporal power but for self-knowledge and an understanding of the divine. To Sufis, all those who believe in a higher power and divine connection are Sufis.

Lal Shahbaz Qalandar is one of Sufism's most important figures. Born during the 12th century in what is now Afghanistan, he traveled extensively, seeking spiritual guidance before ensconcing himself in Sehwan. A poet and philosopher, he spent his life preaching and writing. Devotees visit his shrine to satisfy their social and physical needs, but also to find spiritual enlightenment. People bring red and green shawls with Quranic calligraphy in silver and gold threads, along with tributes for their votive offerings.

Many of those killed and wounded last month were performing a devotional ritual of "dhamaal," an ecstatic and coordinated swirl of the head and body that represents a spiritual ascent through the mind to God's love. The lights on the shrine's trees and walls, the crimson hues of oil lamps and candles, and the smell of incense sticks sedate the divine lovers as they whirl faster and faster. Drums, bells, gongs, horns and cymbals make a deafening cacophony.

The devotees believe their prayers are answered and their wounds are healed -- that spiritual guidance is sought and solace is attained. The shrine symbolizes the tolerant, pluralistic and syncretic essence of Islam. All people are the creation of one God, and the connection to the divine is direct, serene and pious.

Salafi jihadism is associated with literal, puritanical and political approaches to Islam. It employs guilt and fear as motivators. Sufism, on the other hand, embodies love and kindness: Obedience to God should come not from fear of hell, but from a desire to be closer to Him. Sufism attests that God has created man with a mind and a free will. It accepts the existence of anti-Islamic authorities and does not seek to replace them by force.

Sufism and its pluralistic tenets are embedded in Pakistani society, but they have been targeted systematically for decades. Former President Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, a hard-line Deobandi Sunni who ruled for more than a decade, infested the country with a program of Islamization and sowed the seeds of extremism. Over the decades, Pakistan has been disfigured as the lines blurred between national and Islamist politics, and as good governance gave way to a fixation on the rivalry with India and the military's narrative of patriotism.

Islamabad's policy of "good and bad" jihadi proxies -- in which the military establishment considers some elements of the Taliban good, and others bad -- has made the situation worse and paved the way for splinter groups. This in turn provided space to those who seek to import one of the most lethal versions of global jihad, that espoused by ISIS. Officials at the country's National Counter Terrorism Authority had previously denied the presence of ISIS in Pakistan. Yet last month, the world witnessed the truth as ISIS turned worshipers of love into dust.

No attack, however, can shatter the Sufi soul, which is free from the dimensions of time and space. "We are having Dhammal this evening as it has continued each evening since centuries," a descendant of Lal Shahbaz Qalandar told me in a phone call shortly after the attack. I could hear the music and the beating of Middle Eastern drums in the background. "My message from the shrine," he added, "is of love, humanity, peace and tolerance."

---

Ms. Malik is a writer in Washington.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170303ed3300010
