Europe Edition
Briefing
James Comey , Emmanuel Macron, Russia: Your Wednesday Briefing

By PATRICK BOEHLER 
1,332 words
10 May 2017
06:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•resident Trump has fired James Comey, the F.B.I. director , citing his handling of the investigation into Hillary Clinton ’ emails.

In a first since the Watergate scandal, the president dismissed the person leading an inquiry bearing on him : Mr. Comey was also investigating Russian meddling in last year’ election.

Mr. Comey, who was four years into a 10-year term, learned of the decision from news reports while addressing F.B.I. employees in Los Angeles.

Here’ our investigation last month into h is  role  at the center of one of the biggest political firestorms in U.S. history.

_____

•r. Trump approved a plan to arm Syrian Kurds with heavier weapons to fight \b ISIS\b0 , despite strong objections from Turkey.

The Kurdish militia, known as the Y.P.G., will participate in the battle to retake Raqqa, the Pentagon said. But Turkey insists that the militia is linked to Kurdish separatists.

Recep Tayyip Erdogan , the Turkish president, is scheduled to meet Mr. Trump in Washington next week.

_____

•he Russian hacking attack intended to disrupt the French election was a reminder that cyberattacks can also be defeated.

In Washington, the director of the National Security Agency testified  before a Senate committee that U.S. intelligence agencies watched the intrusion unfold and warned their French counterparts.

The digital team of the target, the French president-elect, Emmanuel Macron, opted for a “yber-blurring”trategy , creating false email accounts and documents.

_____

•usinesses across France hope that Mr. Macron will reduce regulations , but trade unions have already vowed to stop him from dismantling labor protections.

Manuel Valls , above, a former prime minister, said that he was running in parliamentary elections with  Mr. Macron’ movement. But party officials said they might not have room for the president-elect’ onetime boss.

Here’ a look at reactions to Mr. Macron’ victory from writers across the political spectrum .

_____

•ussia’ Victory Day parade served as a reminder of how isolated the country has become . Igor Dodon, the pro-Russian president of Moldova, was the only foreign leader in the reviewing stand.

Ukraine said that, starting next year, it would no longer celebrate victory over the Nazis in tandem with Russia on May 9, but a day earlier, when it is observed in much of Europe.

Russia’ foreign minister is in the U.S. for a meeting with Mr. Trump and talks on Syria  today and an Arctic Council meeting tomorrow .

_____

•o one has ever reached the top of the Himalayan peak K2 in winter.

Many have died trying. It is the world’ second-highest, but most dangerous mountain, with hurricane-strength winds and freezing temperatures.

This winter, a group of Polish climbers will try it . Our sportswriter went to meet them in Krakow, where they are training for the mission.

_____

Business

•he rise of HNA Group —rom a tiny airline in southern China into   —rom Deutsche Bank’ largest shareholder  —s drawing scrutiny, at home and abroad.

•s the European Unionurges Washington  to commit to the Paris climate deal, here’ a look at the signatories’ommitments : There is no legal obstacle to submitting a weaker pledge, and even reneging on aid goals.

•he first major legislation President Trump signed stands to benefit a business  run until recently by his son-in-law, Jared Kushner .

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets .

In the News

•s many as 245 migrants were feared dead in two shipwrecks in the Mediterranean, pushing the toll so far this year past 1,300. [ The New York Times ]

•Moon Jae-in , a son of North Korean refugees, was sworn in as president of South Korea, returning the country’ liberals to power. [ The New York Times ]

•he Nigerian government is seeking to trade captured Boko Haram commanders for the release of more schoolgirls the militant group abducted in 2014. [ The New York Times ]

•n Germany, the authorities detained a second soldier in their inquiry into a xenophobic group’ plans to stage a terrorist attack and put the blame on migrants. [ Deutsche Welle ]

•IFA announced it would replace the judge and prosecutor whose investigations resulted in the suspensions of Sepp Blatter, Michel Platini and other top soccer officials. [ The New York Times ]

•ormer President Barack Obama could hardly have found less controversial ground for a return to the global stage than discussing food in Italy. [ The New York Times ]

Smarter Living

•ecipe of the day: For a verdant side dish, try a pilaf with parsley, cilantro, chives and mint .

•xperts advise that fitness be assessed during medical exams  because it can better indicate proneness to heart disease.

•ecluttering? There are apps for that .

Noteworthy

•hampions League: Juventus reached the final . Real Madrid, the defending champion, enters the second . Real Madrid, the defending champion, enters -leg match  today of its semifinal against Atléico Madrid with a 3-0 lead.

•NASA ’ Cassini spacecraft has sent images from  inside the rings of Saturn, including the closest views ever of its hazy moon, Titan.

•rass Press, a new satirical paper in Bulgaria, is testing the limits of press freedom in the E.U.’ poorest country . Even the prime minister is a subscriber, though he says the cartoons make him look too fat.

•nd Yotam Ottolenghi, the Israeli-British chef, writes about learning to make flaky phyllo dough  for baklava and tarts. “ou think you’e pretty good at something until you meet someone who has been doing it for 41 years.”

Back Story

Two decades ago, a machine conquered humanity. In chess, that is, when the IBM computer Deep Blue defeated Garry Kasparov , then the world champion.

The two had faced off the previous year, with Mr. Kasparov winning the six-game match , 4-2. But the computer won the rematch, 3½2½

Before the first contest, Mr. Kasparov was reportedly so confident that he turned down an offer to split the $500,000 winnings 60-40. Instead he insisted on a winner-take-all affair.

Then he lost the first game, which was a “hattering experience,”according to his coach .

“’ a human being,”r. Kasparov said after losing the second matchup. “hen I see something that is well beyond my understanding, I’ afraid.”

Mr. Kasparov and chess pundits attributed the loss to a single move, which may have simply been a bug .

According to one of the computer’ designers , Deep Blue was unable to choose a move, so it picked one at random. It was a glitch, but the machine’ counterintuitive play may have confused Mr. Kasparov.

“t was an incredibly refined move,”said the grandmaster Yasser Seirawan . “nd it sent Garry into a tizzy.”

Evan Gershkovich contributed reporting.

_____

This briefing was prepared for the European morning. We also have briefings timed for the Australian , Asian  and American  mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here  .

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at europebriefing@nytimes.com .

Correction: May 18, 2017, Thursday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this briefing misstated how long James Comey served as F.B.I. director. As a correction on the linked article notes, he was in his fourth year when he was fired, not in his third.

Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times | Rodi Said/Reuters | Daniel Leal-Olivas/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Philippe Lopez/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sergei Chirikov/European Pressphoto Agency | Max Whittaker for The New York Times | Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters | Massimo Pica/European Pressphoto Agency | Yunhee Kim for The New York Times. Food stylist: Megan Schlow. Prop stylist: Deborah Williams. | Miguel Medina/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Stan Honda/Agence France-Presse 

Document NYTFEED020170510ed5a00235
