World News:  ISIS  Says It Released Audio Recording of Its Leader

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nancy A. Youssef 
635 words
29 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State said it released the first speech in nearly a year from its leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, with the remarks defying speculation that he was dead and lashing out against the U.S.

The audio recording, about 45 minutes long, sought to reassure Islamic State members that their losses across the Mideast -- from Libya to Iraq -- will lead to their enemies' eventual downfall.

Although the speech gave no indication of when it was recorded, Mr. Baghdadi referred to the political negotiations in Astana, Kazakhstan, between the Syrian opposition and the government. Whether the voice on the recording was Mr. Baghdadi's couldn't be independently verified.

The Russian military said in June that it was investigating whether Mr. Baghdadi was killed in a May airstrike against Islamic State leaders. Russia's foreign minister subsequently qualified that claim, saying reports of his death couldn't be corroborated with 100% certainty. Western and Iraqi officials were skeptical of the report.

The purported speech released Thursday would be the first by Mr. Baghdadi since Islamic State lost Mosul in Iraq this summer, once the largest city under its control, and while U.S.-backed forces are about to cement control over Raqqa in Syria. Both Raqqa and Mosul were the de facto capitals of Islamic State's caliphate, or religious empire.

In Washington, U.S. officials were scrutinizing the message but said they couldn't confirm it was Mr. Baghdadi. "We haven't been able to independently verify," a U.S. military official said. The official said there was no reason at this point not to think it was Mr. Baghdadi on the recording.

Mr. Baghdadi mocks the U.S. on the recording, claiming it "thought it was the greatest nation in the world and has lost its place as the only superpower while falling into huge debts" with a poorly executed Middle East policy. "Russia used this weakness to take America's place as the superpower [in Syria]."

The purported message comes as Pentagon officials fret that Islamic State is planning to become an insurgency in places like Iraq and Syria as its self-proclaimed state collapses.

In Syria, it is among the last remaining forces that could successfully mount a campaign against the regime of President Bashar al-Assad, which depends on help from Iran and Russia to regain territory.

Mr. Assad's tenuous grip, coupled with his dependency on Iran, could create room for ISIS to present itself as the vanguard of Syria's Sunni communities. "That is the fear. They are hanging low and integrating themselves into the population," a defense official explained.

Some military officials celebrated Mr. Baghdadi's message as a concession that the U.S.-led coalition campaign has worked in shrinking the organization's land holdings.

"He's admitting defeat," the first military official said. But he added: "A safe haven is the lifeblood of the insurgency."

Mr. Baghdadi's fortunes have taken a sharp turn downward from his first recorded public appearance in July 2014, when he took the pulpit of Mosul's al-Nuri mosque, establishing his caliphate and declaring himself the leader of the world's Muslim population. He is now believed by U.S. officials to be hiding out in eastern Syria.

Islamic State militants continue to carry out attacks against government forces across the Mideast while a mixture of its supporters and its operatives conduct terror attacks against mostly civilians in the West, leaving Europe on edge.

In the recording Thursday, Mr. Baghdadi appeared to renew a call for fresh recruits while he rallied existing members weary after multiple defeats.

---

Leena Saidi contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170929ed9t0001h
