Mayor Vows to Improve School Safety

By Leslie Brody 
505 words
3 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A12B
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Scores of parent leaders packed a Harlem library Monday to grill New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio about school safety after last week's fatal stabbing of a student inside a Bronx high school.

Bullying appeared to be a factor in the killing, and several parents asked why schools weren't doing more to fight such harassment.

Speakers from around the city said calls to staff to report bullying had elicited too little action; that some schools had too few social workers or psychologists; and that it is too hard for parents to get up-to-date information on violence at their children's schools.

One parent from Queens, Souad Kirama, said she had worked as an advocate for Muslim elementary students who were called ISIS by bullies, and a school principal hadn't returned her call for help. In some cases, she was directed to staffers who had no experience or power to handle such problems. "We'd like to see more compassion, more seriousness," Ms. Kirama said.

The mayor said his administration had sent a message, and "will send it even more rigorously, to everyone in the school community, never ignore an instance of bullying."

Abel Cedeno, 18 years old, was charged with murder last week in the stabbing death of a 15-year-old classmate at the Urban Assembly School for Wildlife Conservation in the Bronx. Mr. Cedeno's lawyers at the Legal Aid Society said he had endured a "long history of bullying." Mr. Cedeno didn't specify that the victim was among those that harassed him, according to police.

Mr. de Blasio was often on the defensive during the meeting that lasted about 1 1/2 hours. He emphasized the city's efforts to teach school staff to de-escalate conflicts, beef up peer mediation, and improve mental-health services.

The mayor said schools had become safer, but parents, police and school staff must communicate better. "We have more to do and we have to do it together."

Schools Chancellor Carmen Farina said professional-development sessions will be held for all teachers, covering conflict resolution and review of protocols for reporting bullying.

Gigs Taylor-Stephenson, a parent-association president at Wadleigh Secondary School for the Performing & Visual Arts in Harlem, said such training mattered only if staff used the lessons. "What do we do as parents to make sure the accountability is there when teachers show up for training because they have to, but they ignore it?" she asked.

Renesha Westbrooks, a parent on the Community Education Council in District 32 Brooklyn, said she was horrified several times to see children hopping around in classrooms, throwing papers in front of teachers who had no control. "I've watched safety guards actually sit there in one spot," she added. "I don't see security guards budge."

The mayor told her "a classroom that is not in order is something we don't accept."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171003eda30001c
