World
Iraqi Troops Press Into Mosul's Old City to Dislodge  ISIS ; U.S.-backed military aims to reclaim militant group's last stronghold in Iraq

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
700 words
18 June 2017
21:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD—raqi forces on Sunday pushed into Mosul's historic Old City, in what is expected to be the final and most intense phase of the fight to retake the country's second-largest city from Islamic State control.

The U.S.-backed offensive began soon after sunrise, with troops advancing on the Old City from three sides, Iraqi military officials said. By nightfall some units had pushed forward a few hundred yards, the military said, which can be considered a substantial gain in an urban environment.

"With the blessing of God, the army, counterterrorism forces and federal police started breaking into the Old City to liberate what is left of the western side of Mosul," Lt. Gen Abdul Amir Yaralla, operations commander in Nineveh province, said in a brief statement.

The fighting is expected to mark the heaviest and bloodiest stage of the monthslong fight for Mosul because the Old City district is a densely populated warren of narrow streets and alleys, which will likely require house-to-house combat to clear out the militants.

"For sure Daesh is going to fight in a fierce way since this is their last place," said Lt. Gen. Abdul Ghani al-Assadi, commander of Iraq's counterterrorism force, the country's special forces, using another name for Islamic State. "But we have taken into consideration how the place is densely populated, the streets are narrow and explosive devices might be placed by the enemy."

The Iraqi military said it has given Islamic State fighters a chance to surrender via announcements by loudspeaker on the battlefield. But both Iraqi and U.S. forces have said in the past they expect the militants to keep fighting.

As night fell, Lt. Gen. Jabbar al-Darraj, commander of the country's 16th division, said on state TV that he hoped Islamic State fighters would give up, and that the Iraqi troops remained ever mindful of noncombatants.

"We have prepared safe corridors to receive civilians and prepared vehicles to transport civilians when we reach them," he said.

The fight for Mosul began in October, with Iraqi military and Kurdish Peshmerga troops pushing through rural areas and outlying villages primarily to the east of the city. Despite casualties among the troops, they made relatively quick progress before entering the city itself.

With U.S.-led coalition air support, including a new policy from Washington that allowed a more visible American troop presence on the ground and greater flexibility in air and artillery targeting, the Iraqi forces retook the east side of the city by the end of January.

In February, Iraqi troops crossed the Tigris river, which splits the city in half, and began squeezing Islamic State deeper into the heart of Mosul's dense neighborhoods. Fighting slowed in recent weeks as Iraqi troops engaged in bitter street-to-street battles in the neighborhoods adjacent to the Old City.

Iraqi troops struggled to advance through streets jammed with abandoned cars, booby-trapped houses and hidden Islamic State sharpshooters, while trying to avoid causing civilian casualties among the thousands of residents rounded up to be used as human shields by Islamic State.

As many as 100,000 civilians remain in the Old City, according to United Nations estimates last week. Fighting has displaced more than 600,000 people just from the west side of the city, the U.N. estimates, with a large number of those pushed into camps near the city.

Iraqi forces gave no timeline for concluding the operation, though officials praised its launch before the end of Islam's holiest month of Ramadan.

"These are blessed days, these are the last 10 days of Ramadan and we hope to achieve victory," said Abdulwahab al-Taee, spokesman for the Interior Ministry, in a statement.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* Iraqi Forces Close In on Militants in Mosul (June 6)

* Foreign \b ISIS\b0  Fighters Increasingly Isolated in Mosul Battle (March 16)

* Iraqis Tell of Islamic State Brutality in Mosul (March 5)

Document WSJO000020170618ed6i00105
