Podcasts
Get to Know ‘he Daily,’ New York Times Podcast

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
347 words
20 October 2017
01:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

This moment demands an explanation. “he Daily”s on a mission to find it.

Twenty minutes a day, five days a week, “he Daily”elps you understand the day’ biggest stories. It’ hosted by the veteran reporter Michael Barbaro and is powered by New York Times journalism.

Listen to the latest episode and subscribe here. Or start with one of our favorites:

Disappearing Factory Jobs

Shannon Mulcahy’ job at an Indiana steel plant moved to Mexico after President Trump vowed to keep factory jobs inside the United States. Listen to this episode.

A Conversation With a Former White Nationalist

Derek Black was poised to help lead the white nationalist movement. And then he left, betraying his family and friends in the process. Listen to this episode.

Haunted by ISIS

After Mosul, Iraq, was liberated, two Times reporters encountered a group of women who had been enslaved by the Islamic State and still believed that it had taken over the world. Listen to this episode.

Life as a G.O.P. Congressman in the Trump Era

A frank interview with Representative Tom Rooney of Florida about what it’ like to be a congressman when the House, Senate and presidency are controlled by your party —ut just about nothing is getting done. Listen to this episode.

An Oval Office Interview

In April, two Times reporters went to the White House to interview the president. Their conversation veered off into allegations of spying and sexual harassment claims against Bill O’eilly. Listen to this episode.

Planning the Perfect Death

Days before he was scheduled to die, John Shields had a surprising idea. He wanted to have a wake for himself. And he would be there. Alive. Listen to this episode here.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet Michael Barbaro at @mikiebarb. And if you’e interested in advertising with “he Daily,”rite to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.

Michael Barbaro 

Document NYTFEED020171019edaj00a9h
