US
Judge Denies Accused Chelsea Bomber's Request to Move Trial; Ahmad Khan Rahimi won't be allowed to change venue out of New York City, a federal judge rules

By Corinne Ramey 
438 words
8 May 2017
19:57
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The man accused of planting and detonating bombs in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood won't be allowed to move his trial out of New York City, a federal judge ruled on Monday.

Lawyers representing Ahmad Khan Rahimi, who faces terrorism charges related to the September 2016 bombings, had asked that the trial be relocated to another venue, such as in Vermont. The lawyers said Mr. Rahimi, 29 years old, couldn't get a fair trial in New York.

U.S. District Judge Richard Berman denied that request Monday, noting that other defendants whose cases received substantial publicity and media coverage had been tried in New York City.

"The court has little or no doubt that a fair and impartial jury can be impaneled in this case, and that defendant Rahimi will receive a fair trial," Judge Berman said in court.

Furthermore, the district from which the jury pool draws includes not only Manhattan but the Bronx, Rockland and Westchester counties, among others, he said.

Federal prosecutors contend that Mr. Rahimi—ho was born in Afghanistan and is a U.S. citizen—lanted bombs in New Jersey and in Chelsea last September. One of the Chelsea devices, which appeared to be made from a pressure cooker and placed in a dumpster, detonated, injuring more than 30 people and causing millions of dollars in damages, prosecutors said.

The defense attorneys, citing survey data, had argued that many potential jurors were either in Chelsea on the day of the bombing or knew someone who was.

They also said local media coverage had jumped to unfair conclusions and prejudiced the jury pool. In court filings, they cited articles with headlines such as, "Chelsea bomb suspect's blood-soaked diary full of ISIS praise."

Assistant U.S. Attorney Emil Bove said unbiased jurors could be found through typical questioning and instructions. "There is a well established procedure for addressing this," Mr. Bove told the judge on Monday.

Mr. Rahimi, wearing a white skullcap and blue jail uniform, quietly watched the proceedings. He also faces related charges in federal and state courts in New Jersey.

Court documents indicate that the lawyers had been involved in plea negotiations since at least February. It was unclear if the negotiations are ongoing.

Mr. Rahimi's New York trial is scheduled to begin on Oct. 2. He faces up to life in prison if convicted.

Write to Corinne Ramey at Corinne.Ramey@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170508ed58004jy
