World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker .

By Gerard Baker 
1,070 words
12 May 2017
13:06
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Trump Travails

President Trump said Thursday he had been planning to fire former FBI Director James Comey  regardless of any advice from the Justice Department because Mr. Comey was a "showboat" who he claimed had lost the faith of his employees. In his first full account of the events that led up to Mr. Comey's dismissal Tuesday, Mr. Trump contradicted the initial White House accounts that he acted after top Justice Department officials recommended Mr. Comey's ouster. The president also confirmed he had asked Mr. Comey whether he was personally a target of a federal investigation into possible ties between the Trump campaign and Russia. In the past three days, the administration's shifting explanations have led new Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein  to insist that the White House correct the record on his role in the firing; Mr. Comey's acting successor, Andrew McCabe, to defend the FBI's integrity;  and Democrats to renew demands that an independent prosecutor take over the Russia probe.

My First Home

First-time buyers are rushing to buy homes  after a decade on the sidelines, promising to kick a housing market already flush with luxury sales into higher gear. Tracking home sales to a particular age group is hard, but a series of data points form a mosaic of a generation of young people ready to buy: The number of new-owner households was double the number of new-renter households in the first quarter of this year, the share of first-time buyers is creeping back toward the historical average and mortgages for first-time buyers are on the rise. For the first time in a decade, new households are overwhelmingly choosing to buy rather than rent. Accordingly, home builders are beginning to shift their focus away from luxury homes and toward those at lower price points to cater to this burgeoning millennial clientele.

The Jonas Touch

Howard Jonas has struck gold.  Again. The businessman and telecom speculator has agreed to sell one of his companies, a long-struggling wireless venture, to Verizon for $3.1 billion, after the price nearly doubled in recent weeks because of a bidding war between Verizon and AT&T that surprised him. It is a big premium for an obscure company called Straight Path Communications that has just nine employees and has yet to build out a network. This marks another windfall for Mr. Jonas, who made a splash in 2000 by selling a stake in internet-calling company Net2Phone for more than $1.1 billion in cash to AT&T . He used that windfall to fund an array of ventures, including looking for shale oil in Mongolia, publishing "Star Trek" comic books and trying to cure cancer. One of his forays led to the creation of Straight Path.

All That Glitters

Immortalized as West Egg and East Egg in F. Scott Fitzgerald's "The Great Gatsby," Long Island's Gold Coast is resurgent, but with a different population:  young families looking for good public schools and alternatives to nosebleed New York City home prices. Instead of seeking sprawling properties with large amounts of acreage, these buyers are fighting over postage-stamp-size properties with easy commutes to Manhattan. There were 5,754 home sales on Long Island (excluding the Hamptons and North Fork) in the first quarter of 2017—he most for that period in 14 years. The uptick is most keenly felt in sought-after North Shore school districts where commute times to Manhattan hover around 30 minutes. To meet the demand, builders are snapping up small houses in coveted areas, demolishing them and constructing larger homes.

Today's Video

Candid Camera

Want to up your video-shooting game? You don't have to be a pro with lots of fancy gear.  Michael Hsu shows how to make the most of your iPhone.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

U.S. Weighs Expanding Laptop Ban to Flights Between U.S. and Europe 

New Census Leader to Inherit Challenges Facing 2020 Count 

WORLD

Trump Administration Reaches Deal With China to Boost Exports 

Kurd-Led Force Homes In on \b ISIS\b0  Bastion With Assent of U.S. and Syria Alike 

BUSINESS

McDonald's Boosts Its Payout for Franchise Upgrades 

Money From Chinese State Giants Helped Fund Aluminum Stockpile 

MARKETS

The Yield Curve in China's Jittery Bond Market Just Inverted 

An Algorithm, an ETF and an Academic Study Walk Into a Bar 

Number of the Day

17%

The approximate drop in Macy's shares Thursday, when the department store reported another quarter of falling sales  ahead of a series of results from other retailers also battling problems with store traffic and online competition.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on Mr. Trump's comments on Mr. Comey? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com . Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on Snap's first quarterly report as a public company,  Steve Shannon of New Jersey commented: "Snap is nothing more than Twitter in a new wrapper. Should anybody be surprised?" David Lazarus of New Jersey weighed in: "Very predictable after the similar problems Twitter had. Facebook and Google totally dominate online advertising and unless antitrust suits get traction, it isn't likely to change." And Jan Rogers Kniffen of Connecticut shared: "Valuation is always a problem when there are no earnings and no likelihood of earnings, and a fierce competitor (Facebook /Instagram ) for the business that is never likely to have earnings. The Cheshire cat begins to fade away, his smile the last to go."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux,"  a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point in Your Inbox

CLICK HERE  to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170512ed5c001up
