ASK A SHOWRUNNER
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECT
This Season of 'Homeland' Was Written in Something Like Real Time

By JUDITH WARNER 
1,631 words
8 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

When Season 6 began this past January, it seemed that the writers of ''Homeland'' had miscalculated. Just five days before the real-life spectacle of a Trump inauguration, ''Homeland'' featured a female president-elect, whose transition team was preparing to take power.

But as the episodes unfolded, art met life to an uncanny degree, sometimes with real-time precision. Fiction and fact converged in story lines around an elaborate web of fake news, the machinations of a powerful ''deep state,'' and the unprecedented sight of a new president at war with the United States intelligence community.

Were the creators of ''Homeland'' supernaturally prescient, or did some fevered rewriting take place in the weeks and months following the November election? Reached by phone this week on a break from adding the finishing touches to the finale on Sunday night, Alex Gansa, the showrunner of ''Homeland,'' said the answer was a little bit of both.

Here's how it happened. (This interview contains spoilers for the first 11 episodes, and has been edited for length and clarity.)

Walk me through how this season came into being.

We began plotting this season almost 14 months ago -- long before the world changed, or at least the United States changed on Election Day. We were hearing from our intelligence community consultants [in Washington, D.C.] that fake news was being propagated in Russia; that these big entities there were putting out stories that were supportive of the Putin regime, and that there was a big social media campaign to influence public opinion -- in Russia and in Western democracies in Europe.

[Read the ''Homeland'' recaps by Judith Warner.]

It hadn't dawned on anyone yet that it was actually happening around the election [in the United States]. Or at least we weren't told at that point by our intelligence people that it was happening. However, it felt like a very ripe idea and we ran with it, to figure out how our deep state/permanent government might go about influencing a recalcitrant president-elect. And we wanted to bring in a president-elect who was at odds with the past 20 or 30 or 40 years of American intelligence work around the world.

That was the seminal idea of the season: what do you do in a transition period when a president-elect finds herself in an adversarial relationship with her intelligence community? Miraculously, that's exactly what happened with the Trump administration.

What's funny is that if Hillary Clinton had been president, she would likely not have been at odds with the intelligence community, right?

That's exactly correct. Her transition would have been one of the smoothest in a long time because she was so involved in the Obama administration in all these various issues.

So these things always turn out in crazy ways. I just remember on Election Day, first of all, not being a Trump supporter, I was a little afraid of what was in store for the country, but I was also afraid that ''Homeland'' had just become irrelevant overnight. And it turned out to be quite the opposite.

First of all, I could never anticipate Trump's antipathy toward the intelligence community. And second of all, it was such a wild card. What began to happen in real life felt in some ways so much more dramatic and so much more terrifying than what we were dramatizing on television. So all those things became concerns to us in the story room.

But with only nine weeks or so to go before the start of the season, you couldn't exactly get a do-over. What did you do?

We had already written Episode 8 (''Alt. Truth'') by the time Election Day occurred, and we had shot through episode 5 or 6. So a considerable amount stayed the same for the first eight episodes -- it was a process of retrofitting some stories into earlier episodes, which obviously hadn't been finished or aired yet.

But from Episode 8 on to the finale, we really did do some gymnastics to change the story and to focus more on the fake news, on the sock puppets, on this battle between the president-elect and the powers that be.

For example, we introduced the character of [the alt-right media personality] Brett O'Keefe earlier than we had anticipated. We went back and retrofitted him into Episode 2. At first, at the beginning of that episode, he was just an angry, indistinct voice coming from downstairs [in Carrie's brownstone].

We went back and we reshot Rupert sitting on the bed with a strained and strange expression on his face as he listens to the actual voice of this new character.

After the election we decided to turn him into not only a creator of fake news but also an online and on-air personality.

He was more of a James O'Keefe figure beforehand, and more of an Alex Jones figure after the election. We always had the idea that the behind-the-scenes character would find Elizabeth Keane's Achilles' heel, which was the memory and love of her son. We turned him into somebody who could verbally attack her on air. And it was really fun to write those rants, I have to say.

The entire idea of a propaganda boiler room was always part of the story, but it assumed a much more prominent place as the election happened, and then as the revelations came out during the transition period. And that's, interestingly enough, when we all sat up a little straighter in the story room. Because we found ourselves in this sort of privileged position of being able to comment on what was actually happening contemporaneously in the world, and that felt energizing to us as storytellers.

The detail about Dar's background with Quinn, which some of us interpreted as some kind of predatory sexual behavior, was that always there from the start?

Well, you know, it was intimated at the end of last season, too. In that scene where Quinn was comatose, and Carrie and Dar were having a conversation by his bedside about how Quinn was originally recruited into the Central Intelligence Agency. But I really prefer to interpret those scenes in a slightly different way. There may have been some predatory behavior, but whether there were actual sexual acts that took place -- look, that's up for interpretation.

In your mind, was there or wasn't there?

You know, I'd rather not say.

The politics of the show feel different this season, and from the start, not just in the later changed episodes. Carrie's personal position has changed a great deal. It feels like Saul's has too. And I'm wondering if that has anything to do with past criticism -- like the ''Homeland is racist'' graffiti that showed up on the wall of the refugee camp in Season 5. It seems like your own personal politics have probably been at odds with the way some people interpret your work.

I will take great issue with the notion that suddenly ''Homeland'' has become politically correct this year. Or that we have somehow changed our politics. I just find that to be a specious argument.

From the very first, ''Homeland,'' Season 1, we had a subversive agenda to put our audience on the side of a Muslim terrorist -- admittedly, an American who had been turned overseas -- but we wanted the audience at the end of that season to root for him to push the button. We wanted to show the other side. We wanted to see what people were thinking and fearing on the other side of the fear equation.

So from the get-go we were very cognizant of what we were doing. And as you watch Carrie Mathison over the seasons, she was the most intense of patriots at the beginning, and she became disillusioned over six seasons with the way America projected its power overseas.

It's not for me to dictate how people respond to the show, but you have to look at season after season, and especially Season 5 when she dropped out of the intelligence business altogether. So that arc has been happening and we have been following our character grow disillusioned with how the war on terror was being waged. And Season 6 was just the last iteration of that journey.

Did the Sekou story line change after the November election?

It didn't. One thing that we were told over and over when we were in D.C. -- and this was from all the military people we talked to, from the all the intelligence people, from all the State Department people, from all the White House staffers -- everybody kept saying that there are no coordinated ISIS or Al Qaeda terror cells in the United States like there are in Europe.

Knowing we were coming back to the United States to tell a story here, we made a very firm determination not to dramatize anything on ''Homeland'' that wasn't an actual threat to this country.

So it left us in an interesting position of where do we find our villain? We're a show about counterterrorism, and where do we find our threat? And so we found our threat in the deep state, in the permanent government.

And that was also something we were nervous about this season. If you purport to be a thriller at some level, how do you engage an audience at that level, that visceral level? So I leave it to our audience to tell us whether we succeeded or not.

Document NYTF000020170408ed480004h
