World
Caught on Video: The Philippines Casino Attack; Officials release video of incident that killed at least 36 people

By Ben Otto and Jake Maxwell Watts 
901 words
3 June 2017
18:52
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA, Philippines—resident Rodrigo Duterte said Saturday that a gunman's rampage at a Manila casino that led to a lethal fire wasn't an act of terrorism despite claims by Islamic State, while casino officials and police unveiled videos they said indicated arson and robbery.

Mr. Duterte said during a news briefing in the southern Philippines that he did not believe the attacker's motive was terrorism.

"That is not the work of the ISIS," he said, speaking of the casino attack directly for the first time since it erupted early Friday. "The work of the ISIS is more cruel and brutal. They would simply kill people for nothing, not even for a reason.''

The incident at the Resorts World complex near Manila's international airport left at least 36 people dead due to smoke inhalation, police said. Islamic State, whose allies are involved in a nearly two-week battle with troops in a southern Philippine city, said one of its followers carried out the violence but the government points to a botched one-man robbery.

Police haven't yet identified the man, whom they said spoke English and Tagalog.

The security footage, shown to media by the casino Saturday evening, showed a tall man dressed in black and carrying a black shoulder bag arriving by taxi at the casino at 12:07 a.m. Friday. He joined two guests in an elevator, then got out on a second-floor parking area.

The man donned a black mask and at 12:11 a.m. entered the casino, walking past a metal detector manned by a female security guard. The guard ran after him, but fled with other employees and guests as the man appeared to show his weapon or fire shots. He was wielding an M4 assault rifle, Armeen Gomez, chief security officer of Resorts World Manila, said at a news conference.

At 12:12 a.m., the footage showed the gunman entering another part of the casino and torching three gaming tables. He then set fire to another table in a gaming salon and other areas.

At 12:18 a.m., he went behind the cashiers' cage and shot and kicked his way into a room where chips were stored, taking about 113 million Philippine pesos ($2.3 million) worth of high-value black chips, casino and police officials said.

Footage next showed security personnel encountering the gunman in what appeared to be a stairwell. Shots were exchanged and the gunman was wounded. He made his way to a fifth-floor room, where he shot and kicked the door until it opened, footage showed. He burned linen in the corridor. Inside the room, and out of view of security cameras, he lay down on the bed, set himself on fire and fatally shot himself, Mr. Gomez said.

Oscar Albayalde, chief of Manila's police, said at the same news conference that the footage was being made public to show that the actions didn't resemble a terrorist attack.

"If he is really a terrorist, with all this ammunition with him, he would have shot everybody there, no?" Mr. Albayalde said, adding that the gunman changed magazines at least three times. "Until we get any indications that this is part of a terror attack or if he is a member of any terror group, then we could not possibly say that this is related to any terror attack."

Mr. Albayalde reiterated authorities' belief that the arson might have been a diversionary tactic to aid the gunman's escape.

Police were using dentures and blood taken from the stairwell to help determine the gunman's identity, Mr. Albayalde said. He added that the gunman spoke Tagalog, according to his taxi driver. Police said on Friday said the man appeared to be a foreigner, but didn't repeat that assessment Saturday.

Mr. Albayalde said that all of the victims, many of whom had barricaded themselves into bathrooms to escape the gunman, had suffocated. Among them were four people from Taiwan and one from mainland China, the Chinese Embassy in Manila said. No other foreigners were reported killed.

Islamic State fanned speculation Friday of a terror attack, claiming that the incident was carried out by a single fighter with the nom de guerre Abu al-Khayr al-Arkabili.

The Philippines is battling Islamic State-linked militants in the southern city of Marawi. Fighters from Saudi Arabia, Yemen and other countries have been killed, along with scores of civilians and troops. The fighting erupted when security forces tried to arrest Isnilon Hapilon, a militant leader whom Islamic State has named its "emir'" of a caliphate it hopes to establish in Muslim-majority areas of Southeast Asia. About 100,000 people have been displaced by the fighting.

Pantaleon Alvarez, speaker of the lower house of Congress, on Saturday called the incident a "clear example of a 'lone wolf' terrorist attack."

''There is a thick fog of uncertainty, which will likely have a negative impact on investment confidence and hit the tourism and budding casino sector," said Richard Heydarian, security and political analyst at De La Salle University in Manila.

Write to Ben Otto at ben.otto@wsj.com and Jake Maxwell Watts at jake.watts@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170603ed6300105
