Politics
Milwaukee Sheriff David Clarke Says He's Joining Homeland Security; The conservative commentator's unconfirmed appointment gets mixed reviews from local law enforcement

By Shibani Mahtani and Zusha Elinson 
862 words
18 May 2017
00:28
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke Jr., a longtime supporter of President Donald Trump and a familiar face in conservative media, said Wednesday he has accepted a federal appointment as assistant secretary in the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. The move, unconfirmed by the department, drew a mixed response from law-enforcement officials.

In an interview with conservative WISN radio host Vicki McKenna, Sheriff Clarke said he would be leaving his position in Milwaukee in June to join the Office of Partnership and Engagement, where he will be the chief liaison between state, local and tribal law enforcement and the federal agency.

Sheriff Clarke, in the interview with Ms. McKenna, said he was "honored and humbled" to be appointed to the position.

In an emailed statement, a spokeswoman for the Department of Homeland Security said the position is a secretarial appointment, typically announced only when made official by the secretary.

"No such announcement with regard to the Office of Public Engagement has been made," the spokeswoman said.

The position won't need Senate confirmation. Craig Peterson, a spokesman for Sheriff Clarke, said the sheriff is "anxious to serve the president."

A prolific user of social media and a regular presence on conservative talk shows in his trademark cowboy hats, Sheriff Clarke has repeatedly stirred controversy with his views.

He has been a vocal opponent of the largely bipartisan movement for criminal justice reform. In a 2015 tweet, the African-American sheriff said Black Lives Matter protesters will "join forces with ISIS" to bring down the country. He has said that mass incarceration of black Americans is a lie and has claimed that undocumented immigrants have more protections than American citizens in sanctuary cities.

Sheriff Clarke has also clashed with big city police chiefs over policing tactics.

Darrel Stephens, executive director of the Major Cities Chiefs Association, which represents police chiefs from the country's largest cities, said Sheriff Clarke's ideas "don't match exactly with the chiefs in the major cities."

Police chiefs in many major cities have tried in recent years to bridge the gap between law enforcement and minority communities, particularly in the wake of riots in Ferguson, Mo., and have taken steps toward community-based policing.

Sheriff Clarke has championed more aggressive tactics, recently labeling the Obama administration's report on 21st-century policing, which says law-enforcement officers should be guardians rather than warriors, as "flawed." He also supports traffic stops and the practice of stopping and searching people suspected of criminal activity, which has been widely criticized by civil rights groups and was found in New York to be unconstitutional.

Major city chiefs have also bristled at the Trump administration's push to have local police carry out immigration enforcement, saying it takes them away from fighting and preventing violent crime while making immigrants less likely to report crimes. Sheriff Clarke has said his department will continue to work with federal agents to enforce federal immigration laws.

"We'll have just to have to see how to goes," said Mr. Stephens. "Given the past, it'll be a challenge to develop a working relationship."

Sheriffs, who are elected and tend to serve more rural, conservative areas, were more supportive of the pick.

"I know David will give it his all," said Jonathan Thompson, executive director of the National Sheriffs Association. "I'm pleased for him and I know he'll serve the country well."

Over a six-month period last year, four inmates died in the Milwaukee County Jail, which Sheriff Clarke oversees, including a baby who died shortly after she was born in the maximum security unit where her mother was held.

Another inmate, 38-year-old Terrill Thomas, died last April of dehydration after the jail cut off his water supply for a week. A jury has recommended criminal charges against seven Milwaukee County jail staffers but not against Sheriff Clarke. Milwaukee County District Attorney John Chisholm is weighing charges against the staffers and could charge more people or fewer.

Mr. Peterson, the sheriff's spokesman, said the "folks who passed away were terribly ill people" and that the role Sheriff Clarke was appointed to has "no connection to any controversy in Milwaukee." He declined to comment further.

In the radio interview, Sheriff Clarke said his experience on the local level will allow him to relay the concerns of law enforcement to the federal government.

Chris Burbank, a former Salt Lake City police chief, said that, given the alleged abuses at the jail, the hiring sends the wrong message to law enforcement.

"The choices being made in the arena of Homeland Security, of ICE, of the AGs office are very slanted toward heavy immigration enforcement and not paying attention to civil rights," said Mr. Burbank, now at the Center for Policing Equity, a research group focused on race and policing. "It's disappointing to see it go more and more in a direction that is not heading toward reform and improvement in law enforcement."

Document WSJO000020170517ed5h007k9
