Briefing
Manchester, Israel, North Carolina: Your Tuesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,284 words
23 May 2017
11:37
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•ISIS lays claim to attack in Britain.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility today for the attack on Manchester Arena, the deadliest terrorist assault in Britain since 2005. The death toll has risen to 22; an 8-year-old girl was among the first  victims to be identified.

The police said the bomber died in the explosion that tore through the venue as the pop star Ariana Grande was ending a concert Monday night. The attack, in which dozens were wounded, was one of the deadliest in Western Europe since 2015.

“t was meant to be a dream, not a nightmare,”aid a woman who attended the concert with her 14-year-old daughter. We spoke with some of the survivors.

Follow our live briefing for the latest updates.

•.S. budget’ winners and losers.

President Trump plans to unveil a $4.1 trillion budget today that would increase spending on the military and border security but cut deeply into programs for the poor.

The proposal includes huge tax cuts but does not change Social Security and Medicare. Here’  who would get what.

Our reporters say the plan is based on wishful thinking; it assumes an economic growth rate of 3 percent, when the post-recession average is 2 percent.

•ll in the family.

As President Trump’ trip overseas continues, the world is learning about the overlap between his relatives and his advisers.

His family-first approach has drawn some positive coverage, especially in Saudi Arabia, where the royal family is synonymous with the governing elite.

Mr. Trump met with President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority today, vowing again to “o everything I can”o achieve a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians.

•eanwhile, back in Washington.

The Trump administration has moved to block an effort by the Office of Government Ethics to identify former lobbyists granted waivers to work in the White House or federal agencies.

A top official in the George W. Bush administration described the move as “nprecedented.”he White House has dismissed the ethics office’ inquiry as politically motivated.

And Michael Flynn, the former national security adviser, misled Pentagon investigators about his ties to Russia, according to a letter released by a top Democrat in Congress on Monday.

There’ a full schedule of congressional testimony today, with Russia to the fore. Our live briefing will have the latest.

•oger Moore, who portrayed James Bond, dies.

The dapper British actor played the secret agent with a license to kill and tongue-in-cheek humor in seven films. He died today in Switzerland at 89.

•ustices reject gerrymandered districts.

The Supreme Court struck down two North Carolina congressional districts on Monday, ruling that lawmakers had violated the Constitution by relying too heavily on race in drawing them.

The decision could affect many voting maps, generally in the South.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

On today’ show, we discuss the latest stop on President Trump’ international trip: Israel.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•ruck driving was once a route into the American middle class. It is now low-paying, grinding, unhealthy work. We talked with drivers about why they do it.

•Jim Hackett, the new chief executive of Ford Motor, has a history of turnaround stories.

•Citigroupagreed to pay $97.4 million to settle a long-running inquiry into money laundering.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•mbrace change in your marriage; your spouse won’ remain the same.

•ow to fi nd child care while you’e traveling.

•ecipe of the day: A glaze to give New York strip steak a kick.

Noteworthy

•he car spins. Tires squeal. She relaxes.

In today’ 360 video, get behind the wheel with Stacey Lee May, one of South Africa’ first female professional car spinners.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Read about how the other side thinks: “rump derangement syndrome,”he likelihood of impeachment, and a progressive argument against “uy American.”

•“hat does it mean, Google? Is it a bird?”

India produces some exceptional coders, but many of its citizens have little sense of the online world.

The internet’ arrival in their lives is a story of hope.

•nside Nike’ Oregon Project.

The world’ largest manufacturer of athletic apparel is working to make American distance running relevant again on the international stage.

But The Times obtained a confidential report by antidoping officials that says the program’ celebrated coach, Alberto Salazar, has violated drug protocols.

•est of late-night TV.

James Corden, the host of “he Late Late Show”nd a London native, offered his condolences to Manchester: “’ telling you, a more tight-knit group of people you will be hard-pressed to find.”

Back Story

If you’e reading this with bifocals, you can thank Benjamin Franklin. He announced the creation of multifocal lenses on this day in 1785.

Like more than 200 million people today, he had to squint to see clearly. Later in life, he carried two pairs of eyeglasses: one for distance, another for reading.

So he pieced together two lenses, cut in half, in a single frame. “y this means, as I wear my spectacles constantly, I have only to move my eyes up or down,”e wrote to a friend.

Franklin, who has been credited with inventing the split-lens spectacles, although that is subject to debate, also produced a sketch of his D.I.Y. fix. It can be found in the Library of Congress.

Bifocal contact lenses came into clinical use in the 1950s, but they were not widely prescribed for decades. In 1986, bifocal lenses cost upward of $400 —lmost $900 in today’ dollars. Now, they can run $50 for a six-week supply.

Other advances to help those with presbyopia, or age-related farsightedness, include the ringlike corneal inlay, which is implanted under the eye’ outer surface.

And the tech-obsessed can look forward to the developing bionic eye.

Danielle Belopotosky contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Concertgoers leaving Manchester Arena in England after a deadly bombing on Monday night. The police are treating the attack as a “errorist incident.” Dave Thompson/Getty Images | Ivanka Trump and her husband, Jared Kushner, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, on Saturday. Ms. Trump has filled in for her father, President Trump, at several events during his overseas trip. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | We interviewed drivers at a truck stop in Effingham, Ill. | George Etheredge for The New York Times | Babulal Singh Neti, center, taught villagers how to use mobile phones in Taradand, India. Mr. Neti bought his first phone in 2001, and said having a smartphone with internet access has been like “iving into a sea with no bottom to it.” Atul Loke for The New York Times | “ wear my spectacles constantly,”enjamin Franklin wrote. | via History Channel | Stacey Lee May is one of South Africa’ first female professional car spinners. Get behind the wheel with her in this 360 video. | By ALEXIA WEBSTER, VEDA SHASTRI and KAITLYN MULLIN 

Document NYTFEED020170523ed5n002ut
