World News:  ISIS  Says It Put Out Speech By Leader

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nancy A. Youssef 
368 words
29 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Islamic State said it released the first speech in nearly a year from its leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, with the remarks defying speculation that he was dead and lashing out against the U.S.

The audio recording, about 45 minutes long, sought to reassure Islamic State members that their losses across the Mideast will lead to their enemies' eventual downfall.

Although the speech gave no indication of when it was recorded, Mr. Baghdadi referred to the political negotiations in Astana, Kazakhstan, between the Syrian opposition and the government. Whether the voice on the recording was Mr. Baghdadi couldn't be independently verified.

The Russian military said in June that it was investigating whether Mr. Baghdadi was killed in a May airstrike against Islamic State leaders. Russia's foreign minister subsequently qualified that claim, saying reports couldn't be corroborated with 100% certainty. Western and Iraqi officials were skeptical of the report.

The purported speech released Thursday would be the first by Mr. Baghdadi since Islamic State lost Mosul in Iraq this summer, once the largest city under its control, and while U.S.-backed forces are about to cement control over Raqqa in Syria. Both Raqqa and Mosul were the de facto capitals of Islamic State's caliphate, or religious empire. At its height in 2014, the caliphate straddled Iraq and Syria, a contiguous territory the size of Belgium and had satellites across the Mideast.

U.S. officials were scrutinizing the message, but said they couldn't confirm it was Mr. Baghdadi. "We haven't been able to independently verify," a U.S. military official said. The official added there was no reason at this point not to think it was Mr. Baghdadi on the recording.

Mr. Baghdadi mocks the U.S. on the recording, claiming it "thought it was the greatest nation in the world and has lost its place as the only superpower while falling into huge debts" with a poorly executed Middle East policy. "Russia used this weakness to take America's place as the superpower [in Syria]."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170929ed9t0001v
