Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
The Times's Letter to Fox

495 words
25 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

I am writing on behalf of The New York Times to request an on-air apology and tweet from Fox & Friends in regards to a malicious and inaccurate segment ''NY Times leak allowed ISIS leader to slip away,'' which aired on Saturday, July 22. Neither the staff at Fox & Friends, nor the writers of a related story on Foxnews.com, appeared to make any attempt to confirm relevant facts, nor did they reach out to The New York Times for comment.

A host on Fox & Friends wrongly states that, ''al-Baghdadi was able to sneak away under the cover of darkness after a New York Times story'' and that the U.S. government ''would have had al-Baghdadi based on the intelligence that we had except someone leaked information to the failing New York Times.''

When in fact the raid against Abu Sayyaf occurred on May 16, 2015 and was announced that day in an official statement by Defense Secretary Ash Carter. Below is an excerpt from the May 16 Pentagon news release:

''Last night, at the direction of the Commander in Chief, I ordered U.S. Special Operations Forces to conduct an operation in al-Amr in eastern Syria to capture an ISIL senior leader known as Abu Sayyaf and his wife Umm Sayyaf. Abu Sayyaf was involved in ISIL's military operations and helped direct the terrorist organization's illicit oil, gas, and financial operations as well. Abu Sayyaf was killed during the course of the operation when he engaged U.S. forces.

U.S. forces captured Umm Sayyaf, who we suspect is a member of ISIL, played an important role in ISIL's terrorist activities, and may have been complicit in what appears to have been the enslavement of a young Yezidi woman rescued last night.''

Baghdadi would have known that Umm Sayyaf, Abu Sayyaf's wife, was being held, if not from his own communications network then from the Pentagon's announcement and news reports about that announcement. If the U.S. government wanted to keep the detention and likely interrogation of the wife secret, the Pentagon would not have publicly announced it.

The New York Times story in question was published on June 8, more than three weeks after the raid. Furthermore, The Times described the piece to the Pentagon before publication and they had no objections. No senior American official complained publicly about the story until now, more than two years later.

We understand that the segment and story are based on a misleading assertion by Gen. Thomas speaking at a conference in Aspen. However, that does not alleviate Fox News of the obligation to seek information from all the stakeholders in a story. With this segment, Fox & Friends demonstrated what little regard it has for reporting facts.

Danielle Rhoades Ha

VP, Communications

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020170725ed7p0006e
