Politics
Donald Trump Takes On Familiar Targets—ntelligence Agencies and the Press; President returns to tweeting and attacking despite GOP lawmakers' hopes for a reset

By Rebecca Ballhaus 
1,189 words
25 February 2017
02:38
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After a week that showed hints of the reset sought by Capitol Hill Republicans, President Donald Trump undertook several new attacks Friday focused on two of his frequent targets: the intelligence community and the press.

Mr. Trump began posting several tweets Friday morning pounding the intelligence community after reports that his chief of staff, Reince Priebus, asked officials at the Federal Bureau of Investigation to refute a report on alleged contacts between Mr. Trump's presidential campaign and Russian intelligence officials.

Later in the morning, he delivered a freewheeling speech to conservative activists decrying the "fake news" media as the "enemy of the people." Several hours later, press secretary Sean Spicer took the unusual step of barring from a briefing several major news outlets that Mr. Trump has criticized in the past, and word began to circulate that a crackdown on leakers was in the works, according to a White House official.

In his speech to the Conservative Political Action Conference, Mr. Trump cited priorities from immigration to trade, and said, "Basically, all I've done is keep my promises."

So far, Mr. Trump has signed 25 executive actions and memorandums. Six of them have established new rules. Nine directed agencies to review current rules and develop strategies to address the president's concerns—or example, a Jan. 28 memorandum ordering the secretary of defense to present a draft of "the plan to defeat ISIS" within 30 days.

Three orders directed agencies to strengthen the implementation of already existing laws, and another three ordered the development of a framework to roll back existing laws, such as regulations on the financial sector, at some point in the future. Two measures amounted to bits of bureaucracy reorganization.

On Friday, Mr. Trump signed his latest executive order, establishing a series of task forces to review existing regulations and recommend whether to repeal or simplify some of them. He said it would achieve "real results when it comes to removing job-killing regulations."

A White House official said Friday that some of Mr. Trump's orders made changes "on the front end," while others were "an initial step in a longer process to fix larger problems."

The White House has yet to present plans to overhaul the tax code or replace former President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act through legislative action, though it has said it is working on both.

The debate over Mr. Trump's policies on health care this week prompted numerous shouting matches between Republican lawmakers and their constituents at town halls across the nation, while Congress was in recess.

New protests are likely to greet an expected revamp next week of an executive order that bans travelers from seven majority Muslim nations from entering the U.S. because of what the White House said are terrorism concerns. The last such order sparked protests in airports across the U.S. and was stayed by a federal court.

"Every day, it is going to be a fight," promised White House chief strategist Steve Bannon during an appearance at the conservative conference in Maryland on Thursday.

John Hudak, deputy director of the Center for Effective Public Management at the nonpartisan Brookings Institution, said Mr. Trump's actions so far suggest "a president who is very interested in effecting public policy, but lacks an understanding of how to actually get the job done."

Mr. Obama, a Democrat, had issued more executive orders and memorandums than Mr. Trump in his first weeks in office. Within his first 30 days, Mr. Obama also signed into law a $787 billion economic stimulus package, one of the largest economic rescue programs since President Franklin Roosevelt's New Deal, and deployed 17,000 additional U.S. troops to Afghanistan.

An example of a troubled executive order is the one Mr. Trump signed on Jan. 25 seeking to withhold federal funding from so-called sanctuary cities, which shield undocumented immigrants in defiance of the government.

The order initially appeared to be a major blow to those cities, which receive hundreds of millions of dollars in funding. But the order failed to define its terms, providing no description of what it deemed a sanctuary city or what types of federal funding it referred to. Three weeks later, the White House still hasn't identified the funds it can shut off.

There are also limits on White House control over the funds. Most federal dollars that go to cities are based on statutory grants that follow a formula and can only be stopped if the funds aren't being spent on the intended purpose. As a result, bond-market analysts said this week that the order is unlikely to hurt the municipalities' credit, at least in the short term.

Earlier this month, the administration made a splash on Wall Street announcing that it intended to scale back the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial overhaul, as part of a sweeping plan to dismantle much of the regulatory system put in place after the financial crisis.

But the orders Mr. Trump signed that day—urrounded by top Wall Street executives including J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. Chief Executive Jamie Dimon—stablished a framework to do so, rather than actually repealing any regulations. One order directed regulators to identify costly rules and laws. Another paved the way for rolling back an Obama-era retirement savings rule that was set to take effect in April.

A presidential memorandum Mr. Trump signed on his third day in office ordering a freeze on the hiring of federal employees was intended to last 90 days, after which the director of the Office of Management and Budget was to recommend a "long-term plan" to reduce the size of the federal workforce.

Mr. Trump's OMB director wasn't confirmed until 25 days after he signed that memorandum—early a third of the time the president had allotted for crafting that plan.

The president isn't the first to launch his administration with a few promises that may ultimately be hard to keep.

In January 2009, Mr. Obama signed an executive order effectively directing his cabinet to examine how to shut down the Guantanamo Bay detention facility within the year.

That mission proved more complicated than he anticipated and faced fierce opposition in Congress, and eight years later, the facility remains open.

Peter Nicholas contributed to this article.

Write to Rebecca Ballhaus at Rebecca.Ballhaus@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Orders Agencies to Review Regulations

* U.S. Talks With Mexico Clouded by Mixed Message

* Bannon Tells CPAC: ‘very Day Is Going to Be a Fight'

* EPA Chief's Emails Show Energy-Firm Ties

* Sessions Reverses Plan to Cut Use of Private Prisons

* Kushner, Ivanka Trump Pushed to Remove Words Critical of Climate Deal From Executive Order

* America's Rowdy Town Halls: More Organic Than Organized

* Several Trump Cabinet Picks Were Donors to His Transition Effort

Document WSJO000020170225ed2p000b5
