World News: World Watch

426 words
25 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A12
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

NEW ZEALAND

Small Party Set to Be

Coalition Kingmaker

New Zealand faces an anxious wait to see which of its major political parties can form a government after a hotly contested election Saturday failed to deliver a clear result.

The leader of the populist New Zealand First party, Winston Peters, will be in the position to decide whether to give the current center-right government a fourth term or empower a resurgent center-left Labour Party, which rocketed back into contention with a new leader.

The campaign divided the South Pacific nation of nearly five million between those who have benefited from the ruling National Party's nine-year stewardship of the economy, which has outpaced most other developed nations, and others who feel they have been left behind.

Mr. Peters, who served as a deputy prime minister in a former National government, is expected to speak with both National and Labour before deciding which to support.

Under the country's German-style mixed-member proportional system, adopted in 1996, New Zealanders vote for a preferred party as well as a candidate to represent their electorate in the 120-seat Parliament.

Immigration was one of the biggest policy differences between the two major parties. New Zealand First takes an especially tough line on immigration.

-- Ben Collins

---

FRANCE

Senate Elections

Are Hit for Macron

French President Emmanuel Macron's centrist party suffered its first electoral blow Sunday, as traditional conservatives dominated Senate elections.

The results are a hit for Mr. Macron as he embarks on a labor-law overhaul he hopes will invigorate the economy.

Truckers plan to block highways Monday in the latest show of defiance.

Mr. Macron could still pass his revamp. The lower house of Parliament has the final say in legislation over the Senate, and lawmakers from the center-right Les Republicains party support many of Mr. Macron's pro-business policy plans.

-- Associated Press

---

LIBYA

U.S. Airstrikes Kill

17 ISIS Militants

U.S. airstrikes killed 17 Islamic State militants in Libya, the U.S. military said. The six "precision airstrikes" on Friday hit an Islamic State desert camp about 50 miles southeast of Sirte, the U.S. Africa Command said.

The camp was used "by ISIS to move fighters in and out of the country; stockpile weapons and equipment; and to plot and conduct attacks," it said.

The strikes were carried out in conjunction with the Libyan military and aligned forces, the U.S. Africa Command said.

-- Associated Press

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170925ed9p0001x
