US
U.S. Veteran Convicted of Terrorism Gets 35 Years in Prison; Tairod Pugh was government's first trial victory against an Islamic State sympathizer

By Maria Armental 
371 words
1 June 2017
03:11
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A U.S. veteran who sought to fight for Islamic State in Syria was sentenced to 35 years in federal prison, the maximum possible sentence.

"The defendant broke his oath to defend our nation and instead made repeated attempts to join ISIL on the battlefield of Syria," said in a statement James P. O'Neill, commissioner of the New York City Police Department.

Tairod Pugh, a 49-year-old U.S. citizen, was convicted last year in what was the government's first trial victory against an Islamic State sympathizer.

His lawyer said she intends to appeal the conviction.

"This is a guy who never had any contact" with terrorists, defense lawyer Susan Kellman said Wednesday, reached by telephone.

"He served his country bravely," Ms. Kellman said, pointing to Mr. Pugh's military service and his contract work for the military over the years.

Ms. Kellman asked the court that Mr. Pugh serves his sentence in Butner, N.C., to be close to family.

The son of a career Air Force officer, Mr. Pugh lived on military bases in the U.S. and Europe for much of his youth, according to court documents. He joined the Air Force in 1986, at age 18. As a mechanic during his four-year enlistment, Mr. Pugh learned to install and maintain aircraft engines, navigation and weapons systems. He later worked as an airplane mechanic for several companies in the U.S. and Middle East.

Government officials said Mr. Pugh, who had been living in Egypt, flew to Turkey on a one-way ticket in January 2015. His intention, they said, was to cross the border into Syria to join Islamic State, a well-known route for radicalized Westerners. As evidence, they pointed at material retrieved from his laptop and other devices, including downloaded Islamic State videos, online searches for terms like "borders controlled by Islamic State" and a letter addressed to his wife in which he declared his intention to become a martyr for Islamic State.

Write to Maria Armental at maria.armental@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170601ed610005l
