World
Ex-CIA Operative Is Caught Up in a Montenegrin Mystery; Why was Joseph Assad in Montenegro as alleged Russian-backed coup plot unfolded?

By Julian E. Barnes in Brussels and Drew Hinshaw in Podgorica, Montenegro 
1,347 words
16 June 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. congressional investigators want to know what an ex-CIA operative was doing in Montenegro last fall at the time of an alleged Russian-backed coup plot against NATO's newest member.

Former Central Intelligence Agency‎fficer Joseph Assad is celebrated in Washington for helping extract dozens of Iraqi Christians from Islamic State territory in 2015‎ Last October, days before a hotly contested national election in Montenegro, Mr. Assad flew to the tiny Balkan country that has been the subject of tensions between the U.S. and Russia.

Why Mr. Assad went is a focus of an espionage trial in Montenegro—nd now a congressional inquiry in Washington.

The imbroglio is a sign that old East-versus-West spy games are alive again in Europe. Current and former U.S. and Russian officials acknowledge privately that their operatives are at work in the Balkans and in Montenegro in particular.

Montenegro's most recent troubles began to unfold when the North Atlantic Treaty Organization said it would admit the country, a setback in Moscow's efforts to block further expansion of the military alliance. Russia immediately declared its opposition, and Western officials say it began a campaign to derail the country's entry.

U.S. and Montenegrin officials say the campaign culminated in a Russian-backed plot that was thwarted at the last moment. The government's opponents say the events amounted to a fake coup intended to rally the people to the ruling party's side.

Congressional officials said they want to learn if Mr. Assad, intentionally or unwittingly, was dragged into the alleged Russian plot. Russia denies backing any coup attempt.

Montenegrin officials said they are investigating whether Mr. Assad was hired to help the alleged perpetrators. Prosecutors have charged 14 people in the alleged plot, including what the indictment describes as a group of Serb nationalists, several of whom called themselves The Wolves. The indictment, recently upheld by Montenegrin courts, says the men planned to overthrow Montenegro's government, possibly kill its prime minister and install a pro-Russian regime. It doesn't charge Mr. Assad, but names him as a potential contractor hired to help to lead a subsequent escape from the country.

U.S. and allied officials have said it makes no sense that the coup plotters would use an outsider to help extract their team from the country. But Montenegrin and U.S. officials said it is possible Russian operatives wanted to associate a former CIA officer unwittingly with the plot so as to obscure Moscow's responsibility.

U.S. and allied officials said one reason they believe there was a coup planned was that Serbian President Aleksandar Vučć said his country's security services had found "undeniable and material" evidence to back the Montenegrin account and cooperated with the investigation.

Prosecutors allege in their indictment that Mr. Assad approached a Florida security firm, Patriot Defense Group, looking for someone to help with "counter surveillance and evacuation" for the opposition party.

Brian Scott, a former CIA official and chief executive of Patriot Defense Group, said a staff member spoke with Mr. Assad about general security work in Montenegro for a company affiliated with Patriot. Mr. Scott said he didn't know if the work was to conduct an evacuation, adding his company quickly turned down the job because it wasn't aligned with his firm's mission to assist U.S. companies overseas.

Mr. Assad, who hasn't been indicted, declined to speak to The Wall Street Journal. His lawyer, Vincent Citro, said Mr. Assad had been in Montenegro to assist a friend and colleague who was managing the opposition's campaign. Mr. Citro says Mr. Assad had nothing to do with any plot and denies Mr. Assad was working as a spy for Russia or anyone else.

Mr. Citro confirmed there was a call between Mr. Assad and Patriot Defense Group. He said Mr. Assad has cooperated with the U.S. government "to clarify misinformation coming from Montenegro" but said he was told his client isn't under investigation.

A story about Mr. Assad and his wife on the website of his college alma mater and a 2016 profile in a Florida newspaper provides this sketch of Mr. Assad: He is an Egyptian Christian raised in Lebanon and Egypt and is now a naturalized U.S. citizen. He moved to the U.S. to attend Palm Beach Atlantic University in Florida, where he focused on political science and biblical studies and graduated in 1994. In 1999, Mr. Assad and his wife, born in the U.S., both joined the CIA.

In 2015, after Mr. Assad moved to a private security consultancy, ABC's 20/20 featured a segment on how the Assads helped rescue 149 Iraqi Christians from ISIS.

Among those charged in the alleged plot in Montenegro are two accused Russian operatives, three members of the Montenegrin opposition and nine Serbs. The trial will hinge on the credibility of the government's main witness, a (unindicted) Serb who in a statement cited in the indictment says he was recruited by a Russian intelligence agent to overthrow a government.

Staff members and investigators of the House Intelligence Committee this week reached out to Mr. Assad and Mr. Scott to ask them questions. "If Americans were involved we need to investigate," said Rep. Devin Nunes (R., Calif.), the committee's chairman. He recently visited Montenegro to meet with prosecutors about the allegations of Russian involvement. "This was an attempt to take down the pro-NATO government by Russian interests," he said.

Last year, Montenegro's Democratic Party of Socialists, which has ruled the country since independence in 2006 and has pushed for NATO membership, faced a stiff challenge from the Democratic Front, a coalition of opposition groups that campaigned on an anticorruption platform and called for a referendum on NATO.

The opposition hired Aron Shaviv, a British-Israeli campaign manager who had made his mark producing amusing political advertisements for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. With Mr. Shaviv's satirical ads poking fun of the government on the air, Mr. Shaviv said, he was followed and pulled over by Montenegrin police and security.

Mr. Shaviv said he called Mr. Assad, with whom he had worked previously, to come to Montenegro to conduct a security assessment. Mr. Assad's lawyer says his client provided the assessments for Mr. Shaviv, then left on the day of the election.

Montenegrin officials say they have no indication Mr. Shaviv was followed by the military or security agencies.

Montenegrin and U.S. congressional investigators have questioned the timing of Mr. Assad's exit. In conversations with the Journal, they asked why a security adviser would leave his client on the day of the election, hours after high-profile arrests of alleged plotters.

Mr. Shaviv, who hasn't been accused in the plot, said the Montenegrin prosecutors' allegations amount to believing Moscow tried to topple a government using a team made up of a political consultant, a former CIA agent and "some farm boys from rural Montenegro with their hunting rifles."

Mr. Shaviv said Montenegro's government faced defeat in the October election and whipped up the "sloppiest conspiracy theory ever concocted." Both the Montenegrin government and ruling-party officials deny the allegation.

The ruling party won the election and on June 5, the country formally joined NATO, becoming its 29th member, delivering a win for the West.

While Russian officials deny they are trying to destabilize NATO aspirants or countries on their borders, U.S. officials said they expect more Russian interference across Europe. Gen. Ben Hodges, a senior U.S. Army commander in Europe, said Russia is "going to continue doing this, putting pressure on countries on their periphery."

Write to Julian E. Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com and Drew Hinshaw at drew.hinshaw@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170616ed6g001gz
