World
Secret Report Shows Just How Badly Belgium Mishandled Hunt for  ISIS  Operatives; Numerous chances to unmask the Abdeslam brothers before the Paris and Brussels attacks were missed

By Valentina Pop and Mark Maremont 
2,360 words
6 January 2017
06:06
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS—elgian police had numerous chances to unmask the Islamic State terror cell that later carried out the Paris and Brussels attacks, according to a confidential report prepared for Belgium's Parliament. They muffed every one.

In early 2015, Brussels police stopped a car driven by Brahim Abdeslam, later one of the Paris attackers, and arrested him for drug possession. At the time, Brahim was on a terror watch list. He carried a booklet about "parental consent for the Jihad." Police found a USB thumb drive hidden behind his car radio.

He was let go after brief questioning. Authorities failed to analyze the thumb drive or other electronics seized after the drug stop from an apartment Brahim shared with his younger brother, also involved in the attacks, Salah Abdeslam. Another unnoticed detail: The email address the suspect supplied, s_orry@hotmail.com, was a fake.

The incident, details of which haven't been previously reported, is outlined in the parliamentary report prepared by Comité, a watchdog agency of former police and judicial officials auditing the work of Belgian police in the wake of the twin attacks. The 82-page report, reviewed by The Wall Street Journal, was finalized in September and hasn't been made public.

European police have foiled many would-be terrorists in recent years. In many of the major attacks that did occur, the terrorists' radical leanings were well known to police, who failed to halt them in time.

German authorities have faced similar criticism for failing to neutralize the suspect in December's Berlin truck attack. The Tunisian immigrant, killed in a shootout in Milan days after the attack, was known to have radical ties and had been ordered to be deported. On Thursday, Germany said top federal and regional security officials met seven times to discuss the potential danger posed by the immigrant before the attack but failed to stop him.

The Belgian report reveals that police had information before the Paris and Brussels attacks that showed the Abdeslam brothers had relationships with other terror suspects; that Brahim wasn't questioned after multiple interactions with law enforcement even though he was on a terror watch list; and that police didn't follow up when Salah changed his social-media profile picture to the ISIS flag.

The Comité report, along with other official documents and interviews with Belgian officials, reveals the extent to which Belgian authorities bungled the investigation of the \b ISIS\b0  cell by ignoring informant tips, failing to heed alerts from other countries and poorly coordinating between law-enforcement branches.

Members of the ISIS cell also left a financial trail, including wire transfers and rental-car transactions. Belgium's antiterror finance investigators were able to reconstruct some of these only after the fact.

Belgian police, for their part, say they are chronically underfunded and overworked.

Nine months after the drug arrest, Brahim, 31 years old, was dead, one of the suicide attackers who killed 130 in the November 2015 Paris attacks. His brother Salah, a key logistics coordinator who had transported many of the Paris terrorists on their journeys from Syria, was on the run, caught in March just before the Brussels attacks that left 32 dead.

Salah, now 27, is being held in France awaiting trial. He is without a lawyer after his representation dropped his case in October. The French prosecutor said Salah admitted he wanted to blow himself up during the attacks but then changed his mind.

The confidential report is part of a broader inquiry by the Belgian Parliament that includes extensive witness testimony. A spokeswoman for Comité confirmed the committee wrote the report but declined to comment further. The Belgian newspaper De Tijd has reported some elements of the report.

The chief federal prosecutor, Frederic Leeuw, accused Comité of "tunnel vision" by using hindsight to focus on only a few suspects, saying police had dozens of cases open at the time. In December testimony before Parliament, he said officials lacked enough evidence before the attacks to arrest the Abdeslams or even get legal permission for wiretaps. "Today we all know what they've done, but at the time there was a box with many missing puzzle pieces."

Federal police dismissed the importance of Brahim's Jihad booklet by explaining that the document "urges the youngster to respect his parents when they oppose the Jihad," according to the Comité report.

Belgian officials said they have improved coordination and beefed up antiterror funding by €00 million, or about $418 million. Lt. Gen. Eddy Testelmans, head of Belgium's foreign intelligence service, said the country is sharing information more efficiently and investing in communications and cybersecurity.

Belgium's state of alert remains at the second-highest level and soldiers continue to be deployed on the streets. Police have arrested dozens of suspects since March, some charged with plotting other attacks.

The Comité report and other documents expose the Belgian security apparatus as underfunded and dysfunctional. Law-enforcement bodies, with no single chain of command, are divided into various fiefs split along linguistic lines—utch in the north and French in the south, with a bilingual Brussels divided among overlapping zones.

The Federal police, which have a counterterrorism unit, rely on obsolete, 1985-era vintage computer systems, federal police chief Catherine De Bolle testified in October.

What should be a simple check to see if a suspect has known terror links requires sifting through 20 different databases. "We need a hit/no-hit system at the national level," the Comité chief wrote to Parliament in the letter accompanying the report. Such a system is being set up, Belgian officials said, but won't be fully operational for two to three years.

Unlike their counterparts in the U.S., Belgian officials haven't focused on financial intelligence to prevent terrorist plots.

Law enforcement before the Paris and Brussels attacks didn't contact the main Belgian counterterror finance agency, the Financial Intelligence Processing Unit, to see if the Abdeslams and others who turned out to be in the Brussels-based ISIS cell had any unusual money transactions, according to Philippe de Koster, the agency's director.

Authorities are still trying to reconstruct some elements of the ISIS cell's financial footprint, said Mr. de Koster, who added that there is now enhanced cooperation.

The Abdeslam brothers were two of five siblings, raised in Molenbeek, a heavily Muslim section of Brussels. Brahim was described by neighbors as quiet, while Salah was friendly and helpful. Both men were born in Brussels, but were French citizens of Moroccan heritage.

Until a few weeks before the attacks, the brothers co-owned a scruffy Molenbeek bar. The brothers sold the bar after local authorities closed it down on suspicion that drugs were being sold and consumed there.

Both brothers had earlier brushes with the law. According to the Comité report, Brahim was involved in 40 offenses starting at age 15, including robbery, weapons possession and drugs. Salah's 12 offenses included a 2010 break-in at a parking garage, for which he served a month in prison.

What is significant about that crime is the person he was caught with: Abdelhamid Abaaoud, a neighborhood friend who later helped lead the Paris attacks and died in a shootout with French police.

Police have described Mr. Abaaoud, a Belgian who went to fight with ISIS in Syria, as the central player in the Brussels ISIS cell. He is believed to have coordinated several plots in Europe, including a May 2014 attack on the Jewish Museum in Brussels, which killed four people. Before the Paris attacks he was among the most wanted ISIS operatives in Europe.

Police had at least two tips linking the Abdeslams to Mr. Abaaoud and to terrorism. The first, in July 2014, came from a Belgian counterterror policewoman of Moroccan descent who was in touch with a neighbor of the Abdeslam family, according to Comité.

She reported that the brothers were getting radicalized, were in touch with Mr. Abaaoud and were planning something "irreversible." Another counterterror police officer, assigned to check out the tip, concluded that at least one of the brothers was "radicalized and wanted to go to Syria, because his mother took his passport away."

However, the officer never shared the information with other police units, because he was uncertain which of the brothers the source was talking about and didn't want to incriminate the wrong one, according to Comité.

The second tip linking the Abdeslams to Mr. Abaaoud came in January 2015, shortly after a police raid and shootout foiled a plot in the eastern Belgian town of Verviers. The plot again had been coordinated by Mr. Abaaoud, at that point a highly sought-after terror suspect.

An informant told police that Salah was a friend of Mr. Abaaoud's and that the two had recently been in touch several times, according to Comité. The informant, who claimed to have talked to Salah, said that his brother Brahim was on his way to Syria, that Salah was ready to follow soon and that Salah said "the brothers in Syria need help."

The tip seemed solid: Brahim had boarded a flight to Turkey two days before the informant's report, according to Comité. Local police found that he had returned to Belgium as of Feb. 9, and he was put on a terror watch list.

Police asked Salah to come in for questioning, according to Comité. When he did, three weeks later, he admitted being friends with Mr. Abaaoud but defended his old burglary partner, saying: "Other than the Jihad, he is a good person."

Salah claimed he hadn't been in touch with Mr. Abaaoud for three years and said he didn't support ISIS. He was let go, the report said.

Electronics belonging to the brothers the police seized after the traffic stop— mobile phone, four computers, two Sim cards and three thumb drives, including the one found hidden behind the car's radio—ould have shown some of these statements to be lies. But they sat untouched by police until after the Paris attacks.

When police finally examined the electronics and cellphone records, they showed that both brothers had been in touch with people known for their radical or terrorist ties. Brahim was communicating with Mohamed Abrini, known as the "man in the hat" seen in surveillance footage of the three Brussels airport bombers, and who now is in custody in Belgium awaiting trial on terrorism charges.

Mr. Abrini's lawyer declined to comment. Two bombers were killed in the attack, and Belgian prosecutors said Mr. Abrini admitted to being the third.

The failure to analyze the electronics was due largely to manpower shortages at the counterterror police, and the pressure of other investigation priorities, the Comité report said.

The federal prosecutors' office repeatedly asked for more to be done with the Abdeslams' case in early 2015, but the counterterror police never assigned a dedicated investigator, saying there was a lack of resources.

Instead, they drafted so-called contextualization reports, intended to unearth the likelihood of terrorism links for a suspect, according to Comité. These reports are "a compilation of information available at a certain point, about the general context and the main actors," according to the watchdog.

Comité said the reports concluded there were "no elements" to suggest the brothers were radicalizing and in touch with known terror suspects.

A judge closed the brothers' case files in June 2015, but kept their names in the European police database with a request for a "discreet check" and an alert to Belgian authorities whenever they crossed a border.

This type of alert, which didn't specifically flag Salah as radicalized, led to a major blunder hours after the Paris attacks: French traffic police stopped Salah as he was fleeing back to Brussels but let him pass. Two hours later, Belgian authorities told French police he was actually on a terror watch list, but it was too late, according to a French parliamentary probe concluded this summer. Salah managed to hide for another four months in Brussels.

In the months preceding the Paris attacks, other movements by Salah throughout Europe were flagged, but to no avail: He was tracked in Greece on Aug. 5, boarding a ferry to Italy with another suspect, according to Comité. Then, on Sept. 9, Salah was checked by Austrian police when traveling from Hungary with two men—ho turned out to be Brussels attackers—n a rented Mercedes. They claimed to be headed to Vienna for vacation.

Although Belgian authorities received alerts in both cases, they were ignored. The report said local police believed the case was being handled by federal authorities, while federal police considered the case closed.

In July 2015, an unnamed partner country provided intelligence suggesting Mr. Abaaoud was returning to Europe with dozens of foreign fighters to mount attacks in several major cities, according to Comité.

The federal police orally told the prosecutor about the tip but didn't share it more broadly, the report said, because they treated the information as classified.

Meanwhile, Brahim's brushes with the law continued—n July, he was found with a knife in a crashed car—ut the incidents weren't properly cross-referenced to his terrorism file.

In August, Brahim checked in at Brussels airport for a 5:10 a.m. flight to Morocco. Federal authorities should have been alerted by border police, but no report was made.

Finally, in late October, three weeks before the Paris attacks, a Belgian terror-threat analysis body detected that Salah had changed his social-media profile picture to an ISIS flag. It alerted federal police. Nothing was done with that information; the police said the case had been closed.

Write to Valentina Pop at valentina.pop@wsj.com and Mark Maremont at mark.maremont@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170105ed150063h
