Military Takes Lead on  ISIS  --- Pentagon is given reins to run global campaign; 'I authorize my military,' Trump says

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
913 words
15 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. military commanders are stepping up their fight against Islamist extremism as President Donald Trump's administration urges them to make more battlefield decisions on their own.

As the White House works on a broad strategy, America's top military commanders are implementing the vision articulated by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis: Decimate Islamic State's Middle East strongholds and ensure that the militants don't establish new beachheads in places such as Afghanistan.

"There's nothing formal, but it is beginning to take shape," a senior U.S. defense official said Friday. "There is a sense among these commanders that they are able to do a bit more -- and so they are."

While military commanders complained about White House micromanagement under former President Barack Obama, they are now being told they have more freedom to make decisions without consulting Mr. Trump. Military commanders are being encouraged to stretch the limits of their existing authorities when needed, but to think seriously about the consequences.

The more muscular military approach is expanding as the Trump administration debates a comprehensive new strategy to defeat Islamic State. Mr. Mattis has sketched out such a global plan, but the administration has yet to agree on it. While the political debate continues, the military is being encouraged to take more aggressive steps against Islamic extremists around the world.

The firmer military stance has fueled concerns among State Department officials working on Middle East policy that the Trump administration is giving short shrift to the diplomatic tools the Obama administration favored. Removing the carrot from the traditional carrot-and-stick approach, some State Department officials warn, could hamper the pursuit of long-term strategies needed to prevent conflicts from reigniting once the shooting stops.

The new approach was on display this week in Afghanistan, where Gen. John Nicholson, head of the U.S.-led coalition there, decided to use one of the military's biggest nonnuclear bombs -- a Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, or MOAB -- to hit a remote Islamic State underground network of tunnels and caves.

Gen. Nicholson said Friday it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in the bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike killed 36 militants, saying it couldn't provide precise figures yet.

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that a second MOAB was available for use in the country, but no decision had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike, which took place in Nangarhar province, along the country's mountainous border with Pakistan.

Gen. Nicholson indicated that he -- not the White House -- decided to drop the bomb. "This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allows me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A senior administration official said Mr. Trump didn't know about the weapon's use until it had been dropped.

Mr. Mattis "is telling them, 'It's not the same as it was, you don't have to ask us before you drop a MOAB,'" the senior defense official said.

Indeed, on Thursday Mr. Trump emphasized the free rein he gives the Pentagon. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

On Friday, the U.S. military said it has sent dozens of soldiers to Somalia, where Mr. Trump recently gave the head of the U.S. Africa Command more leeway to carry out counterterrorism operations against al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda affiliate in the area.

The more aggressive military approach comes as the long slog against Islamic State is bearing fruit. The group is on the back foot in its Iraqi stronghold, Mosul, and is facing a hard battle to defend its de facto Syrian capital, Raqqa.

The U.S. has sent more forces into Iraq and Syria, stepped up support for Saudi Arabia's fight against Houthi militants in Yemen, and dispatched an aircraft carrier to the Korean Peninsula amid evidence that North Korea is preparing a new nuclear test.

The flip side of the Trump administration's emphasis on a more-free-wheeling military approach to Islamic State is an apparent reduction of the use of soft-power tools -- economic development, diplomacy and democracy-building -- favored by the Obama White House.

Some State Department officials describe being cut out from the White House's counterterrorism strategy in the Mideast, with efforts to nurture democratic governments and push for more secular education systems carrying less weight in the White House's evolving approach.

"State is being systematically sidelined," said a State Department official who has worked on counterterrorism in Washington and abroad. The official said the White House strategy of prioritizing military might over diplomacy makes it hard to persuade Mideast allies to relax their grip on power.

---

Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.