Germany's Dispute With Turkey Escalates

By Ruth Bender 
646 words
16 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN -- Germany threatened to pull forces involved in fighting Islamic State from a Turkish air base after Turkey banned lawmakers from visiting German troops, escalating tensions between the two countries.

German Chancellor Angela Merkel on Monday said Turkey's decision to block a visit to the Incirlik Air Base was "unfortunate" as it was "absolutely essential" for lawmakers to be able to visit the soldiers stationed there. Germany's parliament must authorize all military deployments abroad.

"We will continue talks with Turkey but in parallel we will also do what is set out in the mandate, that means, searching for alternatives," Ms. Merkel said.

The threat to pull forces underlines the growing loss of trust between the two North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies over recent months.The two countries have been clashing over a series of issues -- from the detention of German journalists to Turkish government efforts to gain support among Turks in Germany for a constitutional referendum expanding the presidency's powers.

Turkey didn't immediately comment on the development. But while Turkey and European allies have seen relations deteriorate this year, Ankara has taken a more proactive path toward strengthening relations with the U.S. President Recep Tayyip Erdogan is meeting Tuesday with President Donald Trump in Washington, where discussion is expected to focus on deepening intelligence-sharing efforts with Turkey to fight Kurdish terrorists at home and Iraq while the Pentagon implements a plan to arm Kurdish forces in Syria.

In recent months, German officials have studied eight possible alternatives to the Turkish air base in Jordan, Kuwait and Cyprus. But until Monday, officials had publicly stressed that the goal was to stay in Turkey.

That language changedas officials expressed exasperation with Turkey's actions.

Germany has about 250 soldiers, six Tornado reconnaissance planes and a refueling aircraft in Incirlik, where other countries that are part of an international coalition targeting Islamic State in Syria are also represented, including the U.S., Saudi Arabia, Denmark and Qatar.

Last June, Ankara barred German lawmakers from visiting the base after the German parliament voted to label the Ottoman-era massacre of Armenians a genocide.

Turkey relented and authorized a visit in early October, but several lawmakers had been waiting for months to be allowed to visit.

"The ban of lawmakers' visits and the reasons for it provided by Turkey are a slap in the face for all those who despite everything continue to search for a dialogue with Turkey," said Christine Lambrecht, a lawmaker with the Social Democrats.

The defense ministry said it would look more closely at alternatives but added that any move could take months. Jordan is one possibility, but security conditions are less ideal than in Incirlik, said a spokesman for the defense ministry.

According to the German foreign ministry, Turkey told Germany that the visit, which was due to begin Tuesday and had been known to Ankara for weeks, wasn't possible given the current state of German-Turkish relations. Ministry spokesman Martin Schafer said Turkey appeared to be angered by Germany's granting asylum to some Turkish military personnel amid a post-coup-attempt crackdown by Ankara.

Mr. Schafer said Germany had expressed its frustration with the ban via different channels. He also said Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel would raise the issue with other members of the anti-Islamic State coalition and NATO, including the U.S., in Washington later this week.

"We think this is a stumbling block in our joint efforts to defeat ISIS," Mr. Schafer said.

Mr. Schafer said the ban was especially disappointing as it came just days after the German foreign minister told Turkey's prime minister that Germany wanted to improve relations with Turkey, after the two clashed over the detention of a German journalist in Turkey.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170515ed5g0001m
