
For Syria, Words Won't Be Enough

By Paul Wolfowitz 
674 words
6 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A19
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Among the many unintentionally profound comments attributed to Yankee great Yogi Berra, one of the best known is, "When you come to a fork in the road, take it."

President Trump may have initially believed that he could avoid the fork in the road presented by the Assad regime's use of chemical weapons in Syria by simply blaming the crime on Barack Obama's failure to enforce his "red line" four years ago. Fortunately it seems he has reconsidered.

Mr. Trump initially responded on Tuesday by condemning the attacks as "heinous" and "reprehensible." He added correctly that little children in Syria would not be dying such gruesome and painful deaths, gasping for breath, if Mr. Obama had followed through on his warnings against the use of chemical weapons in that civil war.

That made it briefly appear as though the president might use Mr. Obama's failure as an excuse to avoid action. In a joint press conference Wednesday with Jordan's King Abdullah, however, Mr. Trump said the attacks on Syrian civilians, "innocent little babies" in particular, crosses "many, many lines for me." He continued, "I now have responsibility," and will "carry it very proudly."

Mr. Obama's temporizing has admittedly taken some options away from Mr. Trump. What former Secretary of State John Kerry once described as an "unbelievably small, limited kind" of military strike probably was never sufficient to fulfill its stated purpose: to "hold Bashar Assad accountable." Certainly something more substantial is needed now. And Russia's presence in Syria makes the situation much more problematic. Escaping this crisis through yet another agreement to eliminate Syria's horrific weapons peacefully is no longer feasible.

Let us hope Mr. Trump will reassess the impact of recent statements by members of his administration indicating that the U.S. is prepared to live with the Assad regime. The Syrians -- and their Russian and Iranian backers -- might well have interpreted this as a signal that they could continue terrorizing the population. Ominously, doctors and activists in the Idlib area, where Tuesday's attacks took place, say there has been an upswing in the use of chemical weapons since the end of 2016.

The large numbers of Syrians who see Mr. Assad as no better than ISIS probably believe that the Trump administration has given him a green light. Their seeming acceptance of Mr. Assad must have come as a dash of cold water for our many allies and potential allies who thought the new American president was a strong, bold leader who would stand up to Iran in a way his predecessor did not.

Mr. Trump now needs to back up Wednesday's strong words with leadership. As president, his statements carry weight that they didn't previously. World leaders make life-or-death decisions based on what they believe the American president's words signify about U.S. intentions. If his actions don't match his rhetoric, critical allies will conclude that Mr. Trump is weak, like his predecessor, which will have a damaging ripple effect for U.S. interests throughout the region and the world.

As with most such situations, the facts of the case are not yet completely clear. The Russians are claiming that Syrian warplanes targeted rebels who were producing toxic projectiles -- an unconvincing story, but the facts do need to be investigated.

While the investigation is under way, the Trump administration should not spend the time hoping that the problem will go away. Instead, they should use it to prepare a bold course of action to end these barbaric attacks and restore peace to Syria. That is no small task.

Indeed, the Trump administration foreign policy is facing its first serious fork in the road. The president seems ready to take on the burden. All Americans should hope that he does not fail.

---

Mr. Wolfowitz, an American Enterprise Institute scholar, has served as deputy defense secretary and ambassador to Indonesia.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170406ed460001i
