Best of the Web
Opinion
From Charlottesville to Boston; Antifa protesters gather up north.

By James Freeman 
1,050 words
21 August 2017
21:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Struggling to find neo-Nazis to condemn in Boston on Saturday, some activists decided to attack the police instead. Or perhaps that was their objective all along. Meanwhile, a new report from Charlottesville offers some support for President Donald Trump's interpretation of the tragic events of August 12.

Thank goodness that in our nation of 323 million people, neo-Nazis are extremely rare. But this can make the task of confronting them rather challenging. Tens of thousands of protesters descended on Boston Common Saturday in search of white supremacists to condemn at an event called the Boston Free Speech Rally. But it was unclear how many supremacists could be found within the tiny group of free speakers.

The New York Timesreports that rally "participants appeared to number only in the dozens." Among the speakers in this small group was Shiva Ayyadurai, an immigrant from India and former technology entrepreneur who holds several degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Mr. Ayyadurai, who is seeking the Republican nomination to challenge Bay State Democrat Sen. Elizabeth Warren, later tweeted, "FAKE NEWS scam saying Boston Free Speech Rally was NAZI event!"

RealClearPolitics has the video of Mr. Ayyadurai's appearance, in which he stands in front of supporters holding signs saying, "Black Lives Do Matter" and condemns racist comments made over the years by elected Democrats.

Boston Globe columnist Jeff Jacoby summed up the day's events with his own tweet:

The rally in a nutshell: "Excuse me," one man innocently asked a Globe reporter, "where are the white supremacists?"

The Journal, with a Saturday article and accompanying video, did manage to find a rally attendee who described himself as "somewhat" of a white nationalist:

Fred Peck, a 66-year-old retired landscaper from Lynn, Mass., said he identifies with white nationalism because he feels white men are being "left out."

"Affirmative action has gotten to include everyone on the planet who's not a straight white guy," he said.

Mr. Peck added that white nationalists "shouldn't go to the extremes where it hurts other people," a point of view which would seem to rule him out of the Nazi category.

For longtime readers of this column, all of this may seem like another installment in the "Life Imitates The Onion" series, and specifically evoke memories of the satirical report that 70% of the attendees at a Klan rally were undercover journalists.

But Saturday's events weren't funny. While thousands of very fine people may have gathered to condemn bigotry, at least some of them went to extremes that could hurt people. Fox News showed a protester assaulting a woman holding an American flag. Protesters also pelted police with rocks and bottles filled with urine. The Associated Press reports that 33 protesters taken into custody will be in court this week. "Arraignments are set for Monday, Tuesday and Wednesday in Boston Municipal Court," says the A.P.

It's unclear exactly how many of those present were very fine, but coverage of the event revealed significant numbers of "Antifa" activists wearing masks. CNNcalls this "a tactic known as 'black bloc' that aims to unify demonstrators' efforts and hide their identities." Journal reader Kathleen Schauer asks why this is necessary if people are showing up to promote a righteous cause.

In any case, Bostonians are certainly relieved that no deaths resulted from Saturday's events. Meanwhile, the local paper in Charlottesville, Virginia has new information about the events that culminated in an alleged white supremacist driving his car into a crowd of protesters and killing Heather Heyer on August 12.

This column was highly skeptical of the President's claim that there were very fine people on both sides in the Charlottesville demonstrations. Specifically, your humble correspondent deemed it unlikely that a non-racist who simply opposed the destruction of statues would stick around once it was clear that participating in the protest would mean demonstrating alongside neo-Nazis.

But is it possible some people stayed in an attempt to prevent violence? Now comes an interview in Charlottesville's Daily Progress newspaper with C.J. Ross, a member of a group called the "Three Percenters." According to the Daily Progress:

In fact, there were two groups of ideologically opposite and armed militia in Charlottesville for the rally. And, while the rally erupted into physical violence, no shots were fired.

Instead, members of the Three Percenters and the Redneck Revolt, a left-leaning militia, said they attempted to thwart fights and provide emergency medical care.

"Probably 80 percent of our members served in Afghanistan or Iraq, so [the violence] wasn't that big of a deal to them. They know how to handle situations," Ross said. "Most organizations like us [and the Revolt] train on a regular basis, so it's no surprise that no shots were fired. We disagree politically [with the Redneck Revolt], but they're good people."

The Daily Progress adds:

Ross said that although the rally didn't go as they expected, he believes the militia's presence helped to prevent escalating violence.

"I feel in some ways that, if we weren't there, things may have been worse. Many people appreciated it and many people didn't," Ross said. "We don't like Nazis. We don't like Antifa. But they both have the right to speak, and that's what we defend. We wanted to support the Constitution and help keep things peaceful.

Kudos to the Daily Progress for continuing to help readers try to understand the events of August 12 after most of the media pack has moved on.

***

Bottom Stories of the Day

Out on a Limb "ISIS 'Genocide' Seriously Threatens Religious Freedom," Daily Caller, August 15

And You Thought Trump's Polls Were Bad "28% Think Climate Scientists Really Understand Climate Change," Ballotpedia, August 21

Same Thing That Happens Every Night "What Happens to Solar Power in an Eclipse? We'll Find Out Monday," New York Times, August 18

***

Follow James Freeman on Twitter.

Subscribe to the Best of the Web email with one click.

To suggest items, please email best@wsj.com.

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web. Thanks to Mark Finkelstein and Raymond Hull.)

Document WSJO000020170821ed8l004bm
