World News: Sunni Iraqis Freed From  ISIS  Grow Angry --- Baghdad struggles to regain trust, rebuild war zones following Islamic State battles

By Maria Abi-Habib 
1,019 words
24 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

RAMADI, Iraq -- Latifah Rasheed is the 74-year-old matriarch of a Sunni Arab family that lived, until one year ago, under Islamic State rule. A son and two grandsons fought for Islamic State and were killed by the Iraqi forces who wrested their town from the extremists.

Mrs. Rasheed and her surviving sons and grandsons said they were prepared to embrace a new Iraq under the Shiite-led government in Baghdad -- but Shiite militias guarding their town said they would arrest the men if they return.

"If we're unable to return home, we'll join whatever comes after Islamic State," said Mrs. Rasheed, who is now living with 13 family members in a one-bedroom home on the outskirts of Baghdad. On the day she spoke, a double suicide attack killed nine pro-government forces in her town, Garma, about 35 miles east of Ramadi.

Such is the challenge Iraq faces in rebuilding cities and towns liberated from Islamic State amid a cycle of sectarianism that shows little sign of ending and an insurgency that remains active across much of the country.

Iraqis from the Sunni Arab minority have been on the outside of power since the 2003 ouster of Saddam Hussein's regime -- an upheaval that ushered in the multiple reincarnations of Sunni insurgency that spawned Islamic State.

Three years ago, when Islamic State took over about 40% of Iraqi territory, its gains were restricted to Iraq's three Sunni-majority provinces.

With the recent recapture of the city of Mosul, Sunni lands have now been largely retaken. Yet one-third of the country's seven million Sunni Arabs have been displaced. Some are blocked from returning at checkpoints manned by Shiite or Kurdish militias screening for militants. Others are prevented from returning because of Islamic State mines.

Many more have no homes to return to, after the militants and the battles to remove them destroyed their towns

"Islamic State flourishes in poverty and desperation," said Ibrahim al-Awsaj, mayor of the Sunni city of Ramadi, which was retaken from the Sunni extremists more than a year ago. "We'll see a second, third or fourth version of Islamic State."

The mayor rattled off the problems his city has faced since it was retaken 1 1/2 years ago. Around 80% of infrastructure remains damaged, including 40,000 of the city's 63,000 residential units.

In this climate, said Mr. Awsaj, who is Sunni, thousands of war widows are struggling to feed their children, many of them sons and daughters of Islamic State fighters. That leaves families vulnerable to insurgents who have drafted child soldiers and lured the destitute by offering salaries.

Government officials say rebuilding has been slow because of a lack of federal funds and international aid. Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said this month that the government is working at maximum capacity to return the displaced.

U.S. Col. Ryan Dillon, the spokesman for the U.S.-led campaign to beat Islamic State, praised what he said were Mr. Abadi's efforts to involve all ethnicities and religions in reunification and reconstruction.

For many Sunnis, Baghdad isn't doing enough. "This government is a complete failure. The only thing it's good for is corruption and sectarianism," Mrs. Rasheed said. That view has helped fuel multiple incarnations of Sunni insurgency.

The Iraqi government is working to regain the population's trust to fight off future radicalism by employing local residents to help with reconstruction.

"With Islamic State, Iraqis have learned their lesson. Islamic State ended in destruction and Iraqis won't let themselves be cheated again," said Dr. Majda Mohamed, spokeswoman for a special task force designed to stabilize post-Islamic State areas.

Baghdad doesn't have enough money to rebuild war zones. The economy is heavily dependent on oil and the global slump in prices left the central government without enough revenue.

About $210 million has been put into Iraq's reconstruction fund since it was created in 2015, far from the $100 billion that the government estimates is needed.In some places where reconstruction has started, residents said corruption is seeping into the process.

Saad Hamadi, 33, clears Ramadi's streets of the postwar detritus. As a city employee, he is supposed to be paid 15,000 Iraqi dinars a day, or about $13. He said he usually gets 10,000 dinars because the municipality charges him to use their tools. That, he says, is illegal.

"We already lack services and then we see that we are victims of corruption," said Mr. Hamadi. "The people talk, but no one listens to us."

---

Ghassan Adnan contributed to this article.

---

Minority Discontent

Fueled Militants

---

Ex-Saddam-era officers

established insurgency

After the 2003 U.S.-led invasion, a group of Iraqi and foreign fighters emerged as al Qaeda in Iraq. The group was soon infused with military officers forced by the U.S. from their posts, with thousands of government officials, because they were members of former President Saddam Hussein's Baath Party.

Disgruntled security officers established the insurgency that haunts Iraq to this day.

The insurgents killed thousands of U.S. and Iraqi troops before the group was severely weakened by 2007 and melted back into the population.

In the years that followed, they pursued a low-level insurgency while maintaining ties to local Sunni communities.

Sunni discontent with the government continued to fester, and in 2013, Sunni insurgents took advantage of antigovernment protests in parts of Iraq. They called themselves "tribal revolutionaries" -- then, in 2014 unfurled their black banners and morphed into Islamic State.

As the group sought to set up a religious empire across Iraq and Syria, it presented itself as the protector of a minority under siege.

Three years of war against Islamic State have done little to heal the divides between majority Shiites and the sizable Sunni Arab and Kurdish minorities.

-- Maria Abi-Habib

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170724ed7o0001c
