World News: U.S. Split on Plan to Beat  ISIS  in Syria --- Divisions within the Trump administration may delay decisions on Raqqa offensive

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
821 words
10 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. hopes of capturing Islamic State's Syrian stronghold of Raqqa have become entangled in an intense debate over the offensive that is threatening to delay key decisions for weeks, according to U.S. officials.

The Trump administration is facing internal divisions over the strategy for pushing Islamic State out of Raqqa without alienating Turkey, a vital North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally that opposes America's ongoing work with Kurdish fighters in Syria that Ankara views as terrorists.

Because of Turkey's opposition, the new administration may not finalize its plans for taking Raqqa until Turkey votes April 16 in a referendum that would give President Recep Tayyip Erdogan sweeping powers, according to U.S. officials involved in the internal debate.

"Everything is red hot," one senior administration official involved in the debate said.

While the debate in Washington continues, rival forces in Syria are jockeying for position on the battlefield in an effort to expand their influence.

At a Senate hearing on Thursday, Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) expressed concern about the situation in Syria. "I think there's a possibility of an impending conflict between Turkey and the Kurds, as opposed to us working together to try to defeat ISIS and remove them from Raqqa," Mr. McCain said to Gen. Joe Votel, head of U.S. Central Command, which oversees the fight in Syria.

"We are trying to take actions to prevent that from occurring," Gen. Votel said.

Pentagon officials said Thursday that the military has moved the first of what could be hundreds of Marines into Syria, where they would provide artillery support for ground forces preparing for the assault on Raqqa.

A central question is who the U.S. should work with to push Islamic State out of Raqqa. Some U.S. officials are pressing the White House to re-evaluate America's close military ties with the Kurdish fighters in Syria as a way to assuage Mr. Erdogan. Others want the U.S. to work with Kurdish forces to take Raqqa, but then consider handing control of the city over to a local council sympathetic to the Syrian regime and its Russian backers.

"There's not anything near an agreement or a plan," said a senior U.S. military official. "It's up to the White House."

The Turkish prime minister, Binali Yildirim, said Thursday that Turkey was waiting for the U.S. decision about its strategy and choice of partner for the battle for Raqqa, and warned that bilateral relations would suffer if U.S. support for its Syrian Kurdish partners continued.

Another senior administration official said it likely will be weeks before President Donald Trump makes a decision. Part of the delay is due to an effort to determine how the strategy in Raqqa fits into the broader fight against Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and beyond. "It's got to be connected to the larger campaign," the official said.

Last week, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis sent the White House his 30-day review of the strategy for fighting Islamic State. Hopes for a quick decision from Mr. Trump have given way to a growing realization the debate is unsettled.

"The aim is there to take Raqqa quickly, but we're all waiting for Washington to move forward on a plan," said a senior European diplomat who is part of the "Friends of Syria" alliance, a coalition of 11 Western and Arab countries led by the U.S. that once opposed Syrian President Bashar al-Assad's rule, although some members have softened to the Syrian president as he has recaptured territory over the years.

Despite Turkey's objections, the Obama administration pressed ahead with a military strategy that relies heavily on the Kurdish force, known as the YPG, that is working with U.S. special operations forces to encircle Raqqa. The YPG and its Arab allies are now less than 6 miles outside the Islamic State stronghold as they await word from Washington on the new strategy.

Inside the Trump administration, one faction is pushing the White House to directly arm the YPG, a move that would antagonize Mr. Erdogan.

Another faction is struggling to find ways to allay Mr. Erdogan's concerns about America's work with the Kurdish forces. In one effort to do so, some administration officials are urging the White House to re-evaluate America's relationship with the Kurdish fighters after the fight for Raqqa.

Untangling American ties with the YPG could be difficult. The U.S. currently has hundreds of special operations forces working with the Kurdish fighters in Syria.

---

Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170310ed3a0000w
