Times Insider
'Collect Evidence and Cover Your Backside’

By MARIE TAE McDERMOTT and MICHAEL GOLD 
1,076 words
20 May 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment. Some comments were edited for length and clarity.

One of our most-commented-on stories this week was about President Trump’ meeting with Russia’ foreign minister and its ambassador, in which he revealed highly classified intelligence, according to a current government official and a former one. The story received more than 5,400 comments on nytimes.com and thousands more across our social media pages. We published some of the most notable ones here.

Sharing Intelligence With Russia

1. ISIS is the enemy of both Russia and the US.

Other than Russia, what other nation has committed more military resources to rid Syria of ISIS? If ISIS truly is the enemy and we are serious about defeating them, maybe some collusion between Russia and the US is justified.

—Mike Edwards in Providence, R.I., reacting to an article about President Trump’ disclosure of highly classified information to Russia.

2. President Trump is now officially out of control. He has, to-date, not demonstrated any sort of competency to be POTUS. But that in and of itself is not an impeachable offense and is rather subjective in nature. But this news, that he has revealed highly classified information to a hostile adversary is beyond the pale.

He has no idea what he is doing and has now entered the realm of actions that are detrimental to the security of the United States. President Trump needs to be impeached.

—Scott in Middle of the Pacific.

This comment received more than 6,520 reader recommendations.

Jimmy Fallon

3 . Considering that the presidency is the most powerful job in our country, maybe interviews with candidates should be more serious and about policy. Let’ make sure that they’e actually qualified to lead before the election.

—John Kowalski, on The  New York Times’ Facebook page, reacting to a profile of Jimmy Fallon in which the late-night host addressed a controversial interview he conducted with Mr. Trump before the election.

4 . I appreciate Jimmy Fallon and his humor. It’ the one show that makes me laugh, introduces me to new music and allows me to escape the everyday politics that I read about and hear about every second. It’ the comic relief that we all so desperately need.

— Courtney Alex Wittenstein, on  T he Times’ Facebook page .

James Comey’ Memo

5. Mr. Comey’ memos sound like the actions of an experienced F.B.I. director: Collect evidence and cover your backside. I would have postmarked a letter to myself the same day and left the envelope sealed. Comey is apparently smart enough that he doesn’ need tapes. Although, any evidence of actual recordings would be quite hilarious. Once again, we find President Trump outclassed. He sure knows how to pick a fight with the wrong people.

—Andy in Salt Lake City, Utah, reacting to an article about a memo written by Mr. Comey saying that Mr. Trump asked him to shut down a federal investigation into Michael T. Flynn.

This comment received more than 4,430 reader recommendations.

6. If Trump obstructed justice in February, why is this a revelation in May? Would Comey be so principled if he were still in his job? Is anyone principled in the media and DC? Trump may be on very thin ice, but I do not see his tormentors as heroes.

The partisanship and dirty games are on display. We got Trump because of this. The insiders won’ be vindicated just because their witch hunt had an actual witch. They are showing themselves, too. I hope some statesmen will be revealed in this tawdry mess. Both parties should be held accountable for giving us [Trump] and [Hillary Clinton] as choices. And shame on us for allowing them to.

—TD.

Mogul to Millennials: Skip the Avocado Toast

7. From an employed millennial, your dollar was worth more than mine is today, and my avocado toast helps me cope with that. Thanks.

—Jason Heinen, on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about an Australian real estate mogul’ suggestion that young adults would be more likely to buy a home if they cut discretionary spending.

8. My grandfather’ starting salary was $19,000 and he bought a house for $25,000. Houses don’ cost one year’ salary anymore. I make good money and don’ spend super frivolously and I still don’ think I’ be in a position to buy, nor am I sure I’ want to. I don’ want to deplete all of my resources on a house.

—Ben Traudt, on The Times’ Facebook page

Robert Mueller

9. Perhaps Mr. Trump will recognize finally that he cannot operate as he did when he led a family-owned business. The separation of powers was put in place for such circumstances as this investigation. I applaud the appointment of Robert Mueller as special counsel; a man of integrity, he is well respected and fair minded.

—Peyton Collier-Kerr in North Carolina, reacting to an article about the appointment of Robert S. Mueller III, a former F.B.I. director, to oversee an investigation into ties between Trump’ campaign and Russian officials.

This comment received more than 1,750 reader replies.

10. What we are seeing is nothing less than an attempted coup by the dirty Democrats.

The Democratic Party is furious over losing the election, so it has decided to render Mr. Trump unable to function. The Democrats have no interest in the truth or in the facts. The political value of these “candals”ests with the existence of investigations; period. Mr. Trump will now find it impossible to cut taxes, reform health care, or conduct foreign policy. He is being effectively neutered in front of the world.

—mark menser in Fort Myers, Fla.

Russian Foreign Ministry, via Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Lathan Goumas/News & Daily Advance, via Associated Press | Bryan Derballa for The New York Times | Bryan Derballa for The New York Times | Pool photo by Andrew Harrer | via Associated Press | Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images | Alan Diaz/Associated Press | J. Scott Applewhite/Associated Press | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170520ed5k0025t
