U.S. News: U.S. Watch

346 words
9 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

ARIZONA

Prison Term Given in

ISIS-Inspired Attack

A federal judge on Wednesday sentenced a Phoenix man to 30 years in prison for helping to plan an Islamic State-inspired attack in Texas, a case that resulted in the first conviction of its kind won by the Justice Department.

Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem, 45 years old, was found guilty in March 2016 of five charges related to his role in plotting an attack by two gunmen on a 2015 event in Garland, Texas, that featured a cartoon-drawing contest of the Prophet Muhammad.

Both gunmen were killed in the attack, which wounded a security guard, and the Islamic State terror group claimed responsibility for the attack.

The case was the first in the U.S. in which someone was tried for actually participating in the plotting of an Islamic State-inspired attack.

-- Dan Frosch

---

NEW YORK

Pentagon May Rent

Trump Tower Space

The U.S. military is looking to lease space in Trump Tower to carry out its support functions for President Donald Trump, who has both a home and an office in the New York skyscraper that bears his name, Pentagon spokesman Lt. Col. J.B. Brindle said.

The military provides medical and communications services that have to be close to the president at all times.

-- Paul Sonne

---

ILLINOIS

Robert Kennedy's

Son Runs for Office

Democrat Chris Kennedy, the son of the late Sen. Robert Kennedy, entered the Illinois governor's race on Wednesda amid a dire state budget crisis and contentious negotiations between the current governor and state lawmakers.

Mr. Kennedy, 53 years old, will seek the Democratic nomination to run against incumbent Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner, a former private-equity executive who recently donated $50 million to his own re-election campaign.

Mr. Kennedy is the founder of Top Box Foods, a Chicago nonprofit that aims to provide healthy, affordable food to underserved neighborhoods, and is the former president of real-estate firm Merchandise Mart Properties.

-- Will Connors

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170209ed290002b
