Briefing
Donald Trump, Hurricane Maria, Sean Spicer: Your Tuesday Briefing

By MARK A. WALSH 
1,195 words
19 September 2017
11:39
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•rump’ warning to North Korea.

If the U.S. is forced to defend itself or its allies, “e will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea,”resident Trump told the U.N General Assembly this morning. Catch up with our live coverage.

Secretary General Antóio Guterres spoke about climate change, Myanmar and trust among nations. Also looming over the assembly this year are issues like the debate over climate change.

•o holds barred.

The special counsel inquiry into Russian interference in the presidential election is opting for aggressive tactics, if early actions are any guide.

Paul Manafort, President Trump’ former campaign chairman, woke up one morning in July to find federal agents with a search warrant had picked the lock of his home and raided it. Soon after, the special counsel threatened to indict him.

•“ind boggling”amage.

Hurricane Maria is barreling through the Caribbean, a region battered by Irma less than two weeks ago, and has struck Dominica, where the prime minister was rescued.

It was upgraded to a Category 5 hurricane this morning, and is headed toward the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico. Here’ a map of its projected path.

Our reporter set out to answer questions about possible links between climate change and extreme weather.

•evastation in Myanmar.

Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the country’ de facto leader, refused in a speech on Monday to criticize  security forces accused of ethnic cleansing.

Hundreds of thousands of Rohingya have fled to Bangladesh, and satellite images show more than 200 villages have been burned.

Despite outrage over the crisis, there have been few calls for sanctions.

•e could have been a contender.

German voters are widely expected to endorse Chancellor Angela Merkel in general elections on Sunday.

That raises the question of what happened to  Martin Schulz, whose chances of unseating her appear to have fizzled.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

We talk to Kenneth Vogel, a Times reporter who overheard talk of how tactics used by the special counsel were rattling the White House legal team.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•oys “”s, crippled by competition and debt, has filed for bankruptcy.

•he chief of Best Buy tells us how the electronics retailer has thrived in the era of Amazon.com.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ur guide to modern parenting: It’ all about juggling responsibilities.

•an we train ourselves to need less sleep? Sadly, no.

•ecipe of the day: a velvet-textured German chocolate cake.

Noteworthy

•eturn to Mosul.

In today’ 360 video, witness the Salman family’ homecoming after Iraqi forces declared victory against the Islamic State in the city.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Writers from across the political spectrum discuss Hillary Clinton’ reckoning with the 2016 campaign.

•racing a Jewish ancestry .

From Poland to Lithuania, our writer navigates historic cities and out-of-the-way towns, finding remnants of the past at every turn.

•id crowd size matter?

After Sean Spicer poked fun at himself at the Emmys, we asked if he regretted his White House briefing about numbers at the presidential inauguration. “f course I do,”e said.

We also reviewed the best and worst moments of the awards show.

•he making of “other!”

Is it the most confusing movie of 2017, or the most provocative? The director Darren Aronofsky and the stars Jennifer Lawrence and Javier Bardem tell us all about it.

•n memoriam .

Stanislav Petrov was a Soviet officer who helped avert nuclear war by deciding —orrectly —hat a warning from a computer system in 1983 about a U.S. missile launch was a false alarm. He was 77.

•est of late-night TV.

James Corden denied kissing Sean Spicer —hen apologized, sort of.

•uotation of the day.

“hey are setting a tone. It’ important early on to strike terror in the hearts of people in Washington, or else you will be rolled.”

—Solomon Wisenberg, a veteran of the investigation that led to the impeachment trial of President Bill Clinton, referring to tactics by the special counsel, Robert Mueller, and prosecutors.

Back Story

North Korea’ economic output might be smaller than Vermont’, but it recently outpaced the entire U.S. in the production of at least one thing: tungsten.

That’ a rare element whose price has surged 50 percent since July.

Tungsten has the highest melting point of any metal, at about 6,192 degrees Fahrenheit, making it useful in light bulbs.

Smartphone makers need tungsten because it helps withstand electronic heat in touchscreens. Armed forces need it for its ability to harden the steel used in missiles. Automakers use 25 percent of the global supply for cutting tools, among other items.

Most of the world’ tungsten comes from China, where the government has been exerting greater control over production, in part because domestic demand has ballooned. The country makes more cars than the U.S. and Japan combined.

Until 1928, when an Appeals Court overturned it, General Electric had a 15-year patent on tungsten for electric light filaments, giving it a near monopoly in the American market.

The U.S. has had concerns about the increasing price of the rare element since at least the 1960s.

Thomas Furse contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse through past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Correction: September 19, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this briefing misstated, in one instance, the nature of tungsten. It is a rare metal, not a rare-earth metal.

President Trump, center, at a U.N. meeting on Monday. He will address the General Assembly today. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Preparations for Hurricane Maria on the French territory of Guadeloupe in the Caribbean on Monday. | Dominique Chomereau-Lamotte/Associated Press | Daw Aung San Suu Kyi after a speech today in Naypyidaw, the capital of Myanmar, in which she addressed the plight of the Rohingya. | Soe Zeya Tun/Reuters | Sean Spicer at the Emmys on Sunday. | Chris Pizzello/Invision, via Associated Press | Tungsten is used in the filaments of incandescent light bulbs. | Associated Press | Thousands have been returning to western Mosul after Iraqi forces pushed ISIS out of the city. The Salman family moves back amid risks and widespread damage to their neighborhood. They now hope to rebuild. | By JOHN BECK, VEDA SHASTRI and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170919ed9j00209
