World
Islamic State Turned Desperate in Mosul Fight, Iraqis Say; Militants deployed suicide bombers and sought young boys for battle, according to commanders and residents

By Asa Fitch and Ali A. Nabhan 
879 words
14 July 2017
01:01
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—n their final days in Mosul, Islamic State militants dispatched dozens of suicide bombers—ncluding women with babies in their arms—nd searched homes for young boys they could force into battle, said Iraqi commanders who led the fight and residents who survived.

Almost all of the terror group's remaining fighters in Mosul's Old City wore suicide vests during gunbattles, and the extremists also strapped bombs to disabled civilians, according to Iraqi commanders who described the fierce resistance Islamic State put up as the last stage of the battle unfolded over the past week.

Civilians who fled late in the battle said Islamic State fighters searched homes periodically. Hassan Yunis Khidhir, a bakery worker who fled his neighborhood last week, said he had his three sons, aged 14, 17 and 20, wear full niqabs, the black face coverings worn by conservative Muslim women, when Islamic State came looking.

"When we finally made it out to the security forces, we were so happy that we all cried because we never expected to make it out alive," Mr. Khidhir said.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared victory over Islamic State in Mosul on Monday after nearly nine months of fighting to recapture Iraq's second-largest city, which Islamic State had held for three years.

Some fighting continued in subsequent days as Iraqi forces coordinated airstrikes with a U.S.-led military coalition on buildings in the Old City's narrow streets where Islamic State fighters were believed to be holed up.

But the fighting seemed to have died down to a large extent on Thursday. Streets in the Old City were strewn with rubble and the twisted metal of bombed-out cars.

Iraqi counterterrorism forces cleared the last buildings in their area of operations on Wednesday afternoon, commanders said, though the forces brought a gray-bearded man wrapped in a blanket on the hood of a Humvee to their headquarters west of the Old City on Thursday morning— newly captured Islamic State suspect, according to an Iraqi soldier.

The Iraqi army was also still battling groups of three or four Islamic State fighters in the Old City on Thursday, according to a commander with those forces who asked not to be named.

Iraqi forces recaptured eastern Mosul in January, and had cornered Islamic State fighters into a shrinking portion of the Old City in the west in recent months.

Surrounded by Iraqi forces, the militants recalled fighters from other areas of the Old City to defend their last patch of territory, said Lt. Col. Salam al-Obaidi, a top field commander in Iraq's counterterrorism forces.

The final push against the militants began on Saturday, at which point Iraqi forces had Islamic State fighters pinned in a long strip of territory in the Old City, running along the western bank of the Tigris River, according to commanders.

As the U.S.-trained counterterrorism forces tried to push from south to north, Islamic State fighters turned to desperate tactics, commanders said.

The militants wore suicide vests with the aim of detonating themselves if they encountered Iraqi forces in close combat, according to a high-ranking officer who asked not to be named. Around 60 suicide bombers were blowing themselves up every day at the end, he said.

Women, some carrying babies, also wore suicide vests and blew themselves up when they reached Iraqi forces, said Lt. Col. Obaidi.

"In this last small area, they weren't able to use their traditional weapons like car bombs, mortars and drones, so they used suicide bombers," he said Thursday in the Old City, smoking a cigarette and drinking Red Bull to stay alert after a grueling battle. "Many were women. More than 25 women detonated explosive vests targeting our troops in the last few days."

The extremists also piled up berms of dirt and rubble at the entrances of narrow alleyways, forcing Iraqi forces to go in on foot to clear buildings before bringing in armored bulldozers to plow paths for armored vehicles, according to Lt. Gen. Sami al-Aridhi, another counterterrorism commander.

"We had to give up all our vehicles and heavy weaponry," he said.

Islamic State fighters, most of them foreigners, had confined around 1,000 civilians to the area, commanders said. That meant Iraqi forces had to be tentative when calling in airstrikes.

On Sunday, when Mr. Abadi arrived in Mosul, there was still a pitched battle for control and the front lines had moved little from the previous day, Iraqi commanders said.

The counterterrorism forces adopted a new strategy, pushing through the middle of the unconquered territory. Separately, Iraqi army units pressed from the north and west, commanders said.

By Monday morning, that strategy was paying off as the forces drew closer to wresting the entire patch from Islamic State and most civilians were evacuated, they said.

Write to Asa Fitch at asa.fitch@wsj.com

More

* Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul (July 11)

* Iraq Marks End of Pivotal Battle Against \b ISIS\b0 (July 10)

* How Islamic State Lost Mosul

Document WSJO000020170713ed7d0086j
