World News: U.S. Isn't After Iraq's Oil, Mattis Says --- American defense chief, on visit to region, will assess efforts in fight against Islamic State

By Gordon Lubold   
832 words
21 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved   

BAGHDAD -- Jim Mattis, ahead of his first trip to Iraq as defense secretary, said he plans to assess the fight against Islamic State in the country and that the U.S. isn't there to take its oil.

"I think all of us here in this room, all of us in America, have paid for our gas and oil all along and I'm sure that we will continue to do so in the future," he told reporters in Abu Dhabi before arriving in Iraq on Monday, part of a seven-day visit to the Middle East. "We are not in Iraq to seize anybody's oil."

The comments by Mr. Mattis are at odds with remarks made repeatedly by President Donald Trump.

Speaking to employees at the Central Intelligence Agency on Jan. 21, Mr. Trump doubled down on campaign rhetoric in which he suggested the U.S. should have taken the oil in exchange for U.S. battlefield sacrifices there.

"The old expression, to the victor belonged the spoils, you remember, they always used to say, keep the oil. If we kept the oil, you probably wouldn't have ISIS, because that's where they made money in the first place," he said, using an acronym for Islamic State. "Should have kept the oil."

Mr. Trump then hinted at the possibility of future operations in the country where the U.S. might do just that. "Maybe you'll have another chance," he said.

While the comments have stirred controversy, Mr. Trump has toyed with policy positions publicly, on Twitter and in speeches, only to back down on some.

On his second overseas trip as defense secretary, Mr. Mattis has sought to reassure allies in Europe about America's commitment to collective security.

He is in Iraq to conduct his own assessment of its security and political situation and the fight to oust Islamic State, he said.

The Sunni Muslim extremist group swept through Iraq in summer 2014, seizing roughly one-third of its territory.

Iraqi forces and the U.S. coalition battling the group in Iraq and Syria have since dealt it a series of battlefield defeats that have shrunk its area of control.

In October, they launched their biggest offensive to date in Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city and an Islamic State stronghold, and have driven it from the city's eastern side.

On Monday, Iraqi ground forces took a key village on the edge the city, reaching the outskirts of the airport as part of a renewed advance.

The security forces pushed into the village of Albo Saif, the first major obstacle to retaking western Mosul from militants, according to military officials. The village sits on high ground and serves as a southern approach to the airport and a sprawling military base used by the Iraqi military before the city fell to Islamic State more than two years ago.

Mr. Trump asked for a review of the fight against Islamic State as part of his push to accelerate the fight. Mr. Mattis is expected to provide his assessment in the coming days.

"We're going into Iraq because I need to get current" on the political enemy and military situation there, he told reporters, "and put it all together in my mind and the only way to do that is to talk to the people responsible there on the ground, that would be the Iraqi political leadership, our partner in this fight."

"We're going to make certain that we have good shared situational awareness of what we face as we work together, fight alongside each other and to destroy ISIS," he added.

Mr. Mattis has had a moderating effect on the commander-in-chief, persuading him -- for now -- that torture isn't an effective battlefield tool.

Mr. Trump said recently that while he doesn't agree with his defense secretary on torture, he would defer to him.

A January executive order by Mr. Trump that temporarily banned entry to the U.S. from citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries included Iraq, and has further fueled Baghdad's concerns about relations, including the fate of interpreters and other Iraqis who have worked with U.S. troops there.

Mr. Trump said the measure was intended to curb the risk of terrorists entering the country. The White House is currently rewriting the order after it was suspended by a federal judge.

"I have not seen the new executive order, but right now I am assured that we will take steps to allow those who fight alongside us for example to be allowed into the United States," Mr. Mattis said. "They will be vetted, obviously, by their performance on the battlefield beside us and I'm sure we'll work through this quickly."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170221ed2l0000z
