World News: Russian Cruise Missiles Strike  ISIS  Sites in Syria

By James Marson in Moscow and Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut 
369 words
1 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Russia launched four cruise missiles at Islamic State targets in Syria from a warship and submarine in the Mediterranean, the Russian Defense Ministry said.

The launches hit sites to the west of Palmyra, which Russian-backed Syrian regime forces and Iranian-backed militias recaptured from Islamic State in March.

Wednesday's strike destroyed all targets, which included heavy weapons and fighters that had been deployed there from Islamic State's stronghold of Raqqa, the Defense Ministry said.

The ministry said U.S., Turkish and Israeli military commanders had been informed about the launches "at the appropriate time."

"We are aware of the reports of Russian cruise missiles, but have no further information to provide," Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition.

The Syrian regime had lost control of the ancient city of Palmyra to the extremist militants for a second time in December as its forces and allies were focused on battling antigovernment rebels in the northern city of Aleppo.

Since regaining control of Palmyra, Syrian forces have continued to advance eastward through the desert controlled by Islamic State.

The push toward the Iraqi border has put the regime and Iranian-backed forces on a collision course with U.S.-backed rebels who are also battling against Islamic State.

In May, the U.S.-led coalition launched airstrikes on those pro-regime forces as they neared the rebels in al-Tanf, near the borders with Iraq and Jordan.

It was only the second time the U.S. launched a deliberate strike against the Syrian regime and came after the coalition said it had warned the pro-regime forces to stop their advance.

The regime has lost most of its territorial control in eastern Syria, maintaining a foothold in only a few large cities.

As the regime has continued to rack up victories against rebels, it has turned more attention to fighting Islamic State, in part as a bid to underscore its long-held narrative that it is fighting terrorism.

---

Ben Kesling in Erbil, Iraq, contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170601ed6100013
