Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; SECTC
Hell on Earth: The Fall of Syria and the Rise of  ISIS 

By GLENN KENNY 
373 words
19 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Advances in image-making technology -- not just digital capture and storage, but ever-shrinking lenses and sensors -- have brought new dimensions to the depiction of reality. ''Hell on Earth: The Fall of Syria and the Rise of ISIS,'' directed by the intrepid journalist Sebastian Junger and the documentarian Nick Quested, contains imagery that was unimaginable not too many years ago.

When I say ''unimaginable,'' I'm not just talking about tech issues. The directors include footage recorded through a device in a motorcycle helmet worn by Mohammed Merah when he killed seven people in southwestern France in 2012. (The actual murders are omitted, but we see the aftermath.) The directors also show videos of the beheadings of several Western captives by masked Islamic State killers; these propaganda videos were noteworthy not just for what they showed, but also for their professional polish. Footage of two Syrian family men, identified only as Marwan and Radwan, who are trying to get themselves and their loved ones out of the country, had to be shot in secret, and looks it.

The movie also tries to explain the causes of what's happening in Syria, and its repercussions. Flawed United States policies get a thorough airing; by the same token, you are left to wonder what could possibly represent a ''winning'' policy here. In his narration, Mr. Junger compares the situation to a bar fight, ''where everyone jumps in and is throwing chairs at each other.'' He adds that in a proxy war, no one gets out clean.

A mostly impressive array of experts (including, in the movie's one unfortunate off note, Michael T. Flynn, who was forced to resign as national security adviser) adds to the merciless clarity of this tragic picture.

Rated R for graphic imagery. In English, French, Arabic and Kurdish, with English subtitles. Running time: 1 hour 39 minutes.

Oil fires set by the Islamic State in Qayara, Iraq, in ''Hell on Earth: The Fall of Syria and the Rise of ISIS,'' which dissects the ascent of that terrorist organization in the Middle East. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NICK QUESTED/JUNGER QUESTED FILMS) 

Document NYTF000020170519ed5j00053
