World; Europe
Suspect in Borussia Dortmund Plot Hoped to Profit Off Attack, Officials Say

By MELISSA EDDY 
1,253 words
21 April 2017
08:49
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN — 28-year-old German-Russian citizen was arrested on Friday and accused of trying to blow up the Borussia Dortmund team bus as part of a plot straight out of a James Bond movie to injure and kill the club’ players, drive down its share price and make a huge profit.

Germany’ elite antiterrorism unit arrested the man, identified only as Sergei W. in keeping with German privacy laws, at his home near the southwestern city of Tüingen early in the morning, federal prosecutors said.

After more than a week of speculation in which the attack was attributed to Islamist terrorists, the far right and the far left, he was charged with attempted murder, inflicting serious bodily harm and carrying out an explosion.

Frauke Köler, the spokeswoman for federal prosecutors, said the purchase of “uspicious options”elated to Borussia Dortmund shares on the morning of the attack, April 11, served as a tip to investigators.

She did not say how investigators became aware of the purchase. Borussia Dortmund shares fell no more than 7 percent at any point after the attack, and they even rose above their pre-bombing price on the day after.

After taking out a short-term loan “orth several tens of thousands of euros,”s. Köler said, the suspect purchased 15,000 put options, which would have entitled him to sell shares at a predetermined price at any point over the next six days —nd the more the stock price dropped, the more lucrative his gains.

Investigators traced the IP address for the purchases to a hotel in Dortmund where the team had been staying before its Champions League quarterfinal match against A.S. Monaco, prosecutors said.

In March, Sergei W. booked a rooftop room, with a clear view of the hedges below where three bombs loaded with shards of metal had been planted. He chose dates for both matches, from April 9 to 13 and 16 to 20, not knowing when the teams would be playing in Dortmund and Monaco.

The bus, painted in the club’ traditional black and yellow, was heavily damaged in the attack in Dortmund, about 60 miles east of the Netherlands border. A piece of shrapnel was found embedded in the headrest of a seat, suggesting the toll could have been much greater had the bombs gone off seconds earlier.

Given the strength of the explosives, the suspect appeared to have sought to cripple the team, betting on a plunging share price that would have allowed him to sell at a substantial profit.

“e could have counted on a considerable fall in the value of the shares, when players had been seriously injured or killed”n the attack, prosecutors said, but they declined to name a specific figure, citing the continuing investigation.

Christian W. Röl, a German financial investor and author, cited the 2006 James Bond film “Casino Royale,”n which the villain is a terrorist financier who seeks to destroy a plane in a short-selling bet against an airline company as an example for the suspect’ plan.

“f it had worked and the team had been hit hard enough that it would have been forced to withdraw from the match and from the tournament, or would have had to reorganize if five or six players had been injured over a long period of time or even killed, then most likely Borussia Dortmund shares could have plunged brutally,”e said. “hen, of course, there would be considerable gains to be made.”

The only player wounded was Marc Bartra, 26, a defender from Spain, who was hit by broken glass and sustained injuries to his right arm and wrist that required surgery, the team said. A police officer was also injured by the blasts.

The attack rattled Germans, coming a year after the country was struck by a series of violent acts by extremists pledging loyalty to the Islamic State, and targeting one of the country’ most successful and longstanding clubs for the de facto national sport.

Many were quick to attribute the attack to Islamic extremists, especially after three letters with identical content were found at the site calling for Germany to pull back from the Western military coalition against the Islamic State and by closing Ramstein Air Base, the main hub for American and NATO military forces in Germany.

But doubts were immediately raised about their authenticity by experts on terrorism and Islam. Over the next 10 days, two other letters claiming to come from right-wing and left-wing political groups emerged, casting further doubt on the veracity of a possible link to Islamic extremists.

Thomas de Maizièe, Germany’ interior minister, praised investigators and the police for their work. He called the motive for the attack “espicable,”oting that the suspect had played on public fears surrounding Islamic extremists for the purpose of personal financial gain.

“t is interesting that someone with a criminal motive here would pose as if he were a terrorist in an especially insidious way to play with peoples’ears,”r. de Maizièe said.

Two people were questioned last week in connection with the bombing, and although the authorities said both men had an “slamist background,”either was found to have played a role in the attack.

One of the men is a 26-year-old Iraqi who remains in detention; the authorities have identified him as the leader of an Islamic State unit who came to Germany last year as part of the wave of migration that has brought more than a million people to the country. The other, a 28-year-old German man in the nearby town of Unna, was released after no evidence was found connecting him to the attack.

Marcel Schmelzer, the club’ captain, said in a statement that it was important for the players to know the motivation behind the attack, which had left them rattled before a crucial match. “or everyone who was sitting on the bus, this would be important information that would make the ability to process this much easier,”e said.

The match was rescheduled for the next night in Dortmund. Monaco won, 3-2, and went on to oust the German team from the competition in the second leg, winning at home, 3-1.

“e had the impression they had the courage to focus fully on sport,”homas Tuchel, Dortmund’ coach, said on Friday. Nevertheless, the players lacked the doggedness needed to pull off a win, and Mr. Tuchel admitted he was reluctant to push too hard after what the team had been through.

Dortmund’ next game is Saturday, against Borussia Möchengladbach, and then the team will play Bayern Munich —he club’ archrival and Germany’ best team —n the semifinal of the national cup tournament.

“very player has his right to take the time he needs to process this,”r. Tuchel said. “or this reason, the next game is only in parenthesis.”

Follow Melissa Eddy on Twitter @meddynyt.

* Iraqi Held After Borussia Dortmund Attack Is Suspected of \b ISIS\b0  Ties

* Letter Found After Borussia Dortmund Bus Attack Demands Pullback in Syria

* Explosions Hit Borussia Dortmund’ Bus in Germany, Wounding a Player

* Terror Raids in Germany Reap More Doubts Than Results

* German Terrorism Case Highlights Europe’ Security Challenges

The Borussia Dortmund team bus was damaged in an explosion in Germany on April 11. | Maja Hitij/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170421ed4l0028l
