Politics
Congressional Leaders Reach Deal to Fund Government Through Sept. 30; The package includes $2 billion more for the National Institutes of Health and leaves funding for the Environmental Protection Agency and Planned Parenthood largely intact

By Siobhan Hughes 
548 words
1 May 2017
05:46
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ongressional leaders have reached an agreement to fund the government through Sept. 30, congressional aides said late Sunday, as the two parties put aside some of their biggest spending fights in a bid to avert a government shutdown early in Donald Trump's presidency.

Details began leaking out late Sunday, with the legislation expected to be released later that night. Congress must pass a government funding measure before midnight Friday, when a partial shutdown will take effect unless Congress acts.

The package, which would fund the government through the end of the current fiscal year, includes a $12.5 billion increase in defense spending, a priority for Mr. Trump and his fellow Republicans, but also a $2 billion increase in funding for the National Institutes of Health, despite Mr. Trump's request to cut funding for the institute, according to a senior congressional aide.

Another $2.5 billion in defense spending would be available if the Trump administration provided a plan to Congress to counter Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

The deal also includes $1.5 billion for border security, with the money to be spent on technology and on repairing existing infrastructure, the aide said.

But the package says explicitly that the money can't be used to pay for the construction of the new border wall that Mr. Trump has made a signature project, a blow to the White House. The agreement also leaves largely intact funding for the Environmental Protection Agency and protects the women's health provider Planned Parenthood Federation of America Inc. from spending cuts, the aide said.

The package comes after Congress passed a one-week measure last week to buy time to hammer out a more complete deal. While in past years Congress has been able to work through differences and keep the government running, anxiety has been heightened since 2013, when conservatives triggered a government shutdown in an ill-fated attempt to block the Affordable Care Act from going into effect.

Those jitters could intensify as Congress turns its attention to the next spending bill, which will cover the fiscal year that begins Oct. 1. The Trump administration has proposed a budget that calls for sharp cuts to spending on foreign aid, environmental protection and public broadcasting, and the White House has shown no signs of backing down from some of its proposals.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is floating a plan to slash 2,300 jobs and 26% of the budget from the State Department, affirming the Trump administration's intention to favor military over diplomatic spending, The Wall Street Journal reported last week.

Write to Siobhan Hughes at siobhan.hughes@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Pushing for Vote on Health Bill, but Stumbling Blocks Remain

* Trump Issues Health 'Guarantee,' Sidesteps Affordability Concerns

* Congressional Leaders Reach Deal to Fund Government Through Sept. 30

* Trump Leaves Open Possibility of Military Action Against North Korea

* White House Aide Revives Pledge to Curb Private-Equity Tax Break, Though Impact Unclear

Document WSJO000020170501ed510008f
