World News: World Watch

343 words
2 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CHINA

ISIS Video Shows

Threats by Uighurs

An Islamic State video appears to show recruits from China's Uighur minority threatening to "avenge oppression," feeding into Beijing's assertion of a growing jihadist-terror threat.

The half-hour video was released Monday by an Islamic State division in western Iraq, said the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors online jihadist activity. Subtitled in both Arabic and Uighur, it shows what SITE says are Uighur fighters on the battlefield, as well as several grisly executions of accused informants.

Recruitment by Middle East jihadist groups has Beijing on increasingly high alert, particularly in its northwest Xinjiang region, which borders Pakistan and Afghanistan and is home to the mostly Muslim Uighur ethnic minority. Leaked Islamic State records show that more than 100 Chinese nationals have joined the group in Syria, according to two recent studies, and Chinese officials say about 300 Uighurs are fighting with the jihadist movement in Syria and Iraq.

-- Te-Ping Chen

---

VATICAN

Victim Leaves Panel

On Protecting Minors

An Irish survivor of clergy sex abuse resigned from Pope Francis' commission for the protection of minors, strongly denouncing the Vatican for hindering the committee's work and bolstering critics who say the current pontificate has failed to adequately address the problem.

In announcing her resignation, Marie Collins, who suffered abuse from a priest as a child and has been a prominent campaigner for the Catholic Church to act more forcefully on the problem, accused the Vatican of leaving the committee under-resourced, failing to disseminate guidelines to bishops on dealing with cases and neglecting to respond to letters from victims.

Ms. Collins's resignation is the latest blow to the pope, who has been accused of failing to back up his strong words on the problem -- he has likened clerical abuse to a "black Mass" -- with concrete actions.

Pope Francis established the commission in 2014 to advise him on ways to prevent sex abuse by priests and church employees.

-- Francis X. Rocca

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170301ed320002s
