World
Russia Investigates if It Killed  ISIS  Leader in Airstrike; Warplanes struck a meeting of high-ranking Islamic State commanders in Syria in May, Moscow says

By Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Julian E. Barnes in Brussels 
749 words
16 June 2017
15:44
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Russian military said Friday it may have killed Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in an airstrike in Syria in late May, a claim that the Pentagon couldn't confirm and Russia's foreign minister quickly played down.

Russia's Defense Ministry said Su-35 and Su-34 warplanes struck a meeting of high-ranking Islamic State commanders near Raqqa, the group's de facto Syrian capital, on May 28.

"According to the information that is now being checked through various channels, Islamic State leader Ibrahim Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi was present at the meeting, and was destroyed as a result of the strike," the statement read.

After the military's announcement, the foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said he didn't have "100% confirmation" that Baghdadi had been killed, Russian news agencies reported.

Navy Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. military had "no information to corroborate those reports" of Baghdadi's death.

In Washington, a senior administration official said the U.S. wasn't able to corroborate the Russian claim. "At this point the claims seem to have a number of infirmities," the official said, noting there has been a pattern of unconfirmed claims by Russia and Syria in the fight against extremists in Syria.

U.S. military and intelligence officials are examining the claim and evidence for it, the official said.

Another senior U.S. official said Russia has reasons to play up their Syria strikes and make sweeping claims of success, even if evidence of that success isn't clear. The official couldn't confirm whether the airstrike in May hit Baghdadi, who has been reported killed several times before.

A Syrian pro-government news website carried a report on June 11 saying Syrian state television had reported the previous weekend that Baghdadi had been killed in an airstrike in Raqqa.

The U.S. and Russia are backing opposing sides in the Syrian conflict, with Moscow supporting the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and the U.S. backing antigovernment rebels. But both Moscow and Washington target Islamic State.

The Russian military said Friday that the U.S. was notified in advance about the time and location of the airstrike in May.

Baghdadi has generally remained in hiding. In November 2016, he delivered a rare audio recording, after a nearly yearlong silence, in which he called on his followers to defend Islamic State strongholds.

Russia has stepped up its attacks against Islamic State in Syria, although they don't account for the majority of Russian strikes, which target antigovernment rebels, according to U.S. officials. The strategy is designed, the U.S. official said, to gain diplomatic leverage internationally and bolster Moscow's case that it is doing more than just propping up Mr. Assad.

The Russian military's claim it had killed Baghdadi may also be intended for a domestic audience.

Ahead of scheduled elections next year, Russian President Vladimir Putin is trying to shore up his image as a strong leader who can protect Russia, and has ramped up strikes against Islamic State to help him make his case, the U.S. official said.

Russia faces a growing threat from Islamic State affiliates in the Caucasus region and former Soviet republics, an issue of growing concern to the Russian government.

Since U.S.-backed Kurdish and Arab forces launched an offensive on Raqqa last week, residents of the city and anti-Islamic State activists have reported increased coalition airstrikes and artillery attacks.

The airstrikes have hit internet cafes, hospitals, mosques, schools and other municipal buildings, and killed dozens of civilians, the residents and activists said. Much of the city's infrastructure was taken over by Islamic State in 2014 and became part of the bureaucracy of its self-declared caliphate.

An audio message circulated Monday on Islamic State social media channels and attributed to spokesman Abi al-Hassan al-Muhajer urged "soldiers of the caliphate" to remain steadfast in Syria and Iraq and followers around the world to follow suit.

Raja Abdulrahim and Noam Raydan in Beirut, Nour Alakraa in Berlin and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.

Write to Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com and Julian E. Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170616ed6g001b9
