News Analysis
World; Europe
U.S. Attack on Syria Cements Kremlin’ Embrace of Assad

By NEIL MacFARQUHAR 
1,471 words
8 April 2017
16:05
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW —f Russia   once maintained at least a semblance of distance from President Bashar al-Assad   of Syria  , it rushed to his defense after the American missile  , it rushed to his defense after the strikes   ordered by President Trump on Thursday. The attack cemented Moscow more closely than ever to the notorious Syrian autocrat.

Even as the United States condemned Mr. Assad for gassing his own citizens and held Russia partly responsible, given its 2013 promise to rid Syria of chemical weapons, the Kremlin kept denying that Syria had any such capability.

By championing Mr. Assad and condemning American “ggression,”resident %20title="More%20articles%20about%20Vladimir%20V.%20Putin.">Vladimir V. Putin   of Russia seemed to be burying the idea that he could somehow cooperate with the Trump administration to end the conflict on his terms.

The solidarity with Damascus is likely to cause problems for Russia in the long run, analysts said, although Mr. Putin probably cannot be persuaded to loosen his embrace any time soon.

The Russian government often takes its time to react to major world events, but the Kremlin issued a prompt statement early Friday castigating the United States   for the missile strikes on Al Shayrat airfield in retaliation for Syria’ chemical weapons attack  .

The Russian Ministry of Defense vowed to strengthen Syria’ air defense systems, sent a frigate on a port call and froze an agreement  with the United States to coordinate activity in Syrian air space.

“utin made a choice —o underline that Assad is his ally,”aid Aleksandr Morozov, an independent political analyst. “his will lead to Russia’ further isolation, but Putin will stand his ground.”

Mr. Morozov and other analysts consider the policy problematic for various reasons.

Russia Partly to Blame

First, Mr. Trump and his secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson  , have painted Russia as at least partly responsible for the carnage among civilians that was fomented by the Assad government.

“oscow’ main problem is not that the U.S. made a strike but that Trump and Tillerson have toughened their rhetoric on Syria and Assad,”aid Vladimir Frolov, a foreign affairs analyst and columnist for Republic.ru.  

He added, “hey have said that Russia is responsible for Assad’ actions and that it didn’ fulfill its responsibilities in terms of chemical weapons disarmament.”

The  chemical attack   in the Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun on Tuesday killed more than 80 people and afflicted hundreds more. Turkey said on Thursday that sarin, a banned nerve agent, had been used.

The United States responded by firing almost 60 cruise missiles at the air base, which housed the warplanes used in the chemical attack. The local governor said five military men and two civilians died.

Winning at Any Cost?

Second, in continuing deadly attacks on civilians, Mr. Assad seems to want to pursue a military victory at any cost  , putting a lie to Russia’ statements that a negotiated settlement is the sole solution.

That risks dragging out a war that Mr. Putin has depicted at home as quick, cheap and easy at a time when many Russians have been struggling economically. Trying to keep the length and cost of the war down is a crucial reason that the Russians will avoid escalating any conflict with the United States, analysts said.

“ussia wants to end the conflict and to diminish its military and economic presence,”aid Andrei Frolov, a defense analyst and the managing editor of the Moscow Defense Brief.

With the next Russian presidential campaign scheduled to start by the end of the year, he said, “here is no need to continue a war outside the country with a weak explanation for the Russian people why Russia is staying there.”

A poll by the independent Levada center in March found that almost 20 percent of Russians already believed that the country’ military involvement in Syria made no sense.

Dangerous Alliance

Third, the Assad alliance could undermine one of Mr. Putin’ main goals for entering the war: to try to make Russia a player on the world stage again as the indispensable broker in the Middle East.

Protecting Mr. Assad could further repulse countries Moscow has been courting, like Turkey and Israel, analysts said —ot to mention much of the world.

In the months immediately after Russia deployed its military in Syria, Maria Zakharova , the spokeswoman for the Foreign Ministry, used to say things like, “e don’ support Assad; what is important for us is to preserve Syrian statehood.”

After the attack, the ministry cranked out a statement lauding Syria for its “ierce battle”gainst “nternational terrorism.”

Aleksei V. Makarkin, the deputy head of the Center for Political Technologies, a think tank based in Moscow, said, “he longer Russia supports Assad, the more dependent it is on him.”

“t the beginning, there was some talk about replacing him, even if gradually,”e said, but that talk has evaporated.

The ostensible reason Mr. Putin deployed his military in Syria in September 2015 was to fight terrorism, but that is often dismissed as the sound-bite logic. Other goals, especially shoring up Mr. Assad, proved more important.

Mr. Putin wanted to resurrect Moscow’ old Soviet reputation as a global military power. Syria proved a showcase for new Russian weapons, and Russia has established two rare overseas bases there.

“ussia will continue to support Assad because he is the only guarantor of Russia’ military presence in Syria and hence of Russia’ military presence in the Middle East over all,”r. Makarkin said.

In addition, Mr. Putin was appalled by the way Western leaders had abandoned former allies like President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt and Col. Muammar Qadhafi of Libya.

Mr. Putin was determined to prove that Russia would stick by its friends and oppose “egime change”ooted in outside intervention.

Russia faults the United States for destabilizing countries like Iraq and Libya —hich some think has provided an opening for Islamic extremists — scenario Mr. Putin was determined to avoid in Syria.

Sanctions and Isolation

Finally, of course, Syria presented Russia with an opportunity to break out of the isolation that resulted from sanctions imposed by the West for its 2014 annexation of Crimea and destabilization of Ukraine.

The Kremlin thought that forging an alliance with the West on Syria would render illogical the idea of maintaining the economic sanctions.

Mr. Trump, during his campaign, seemed to champion the idea, as well, questioning the need for sanctions, suggesting that Crimea probably did belong to Russia and repeatedly praising Mr. Putin as a strong leader. He endorsed the idea that the two countries together fight the Islamic State, also known as ISIL or ISIS.

While that raised suspicions in the United States of collusion, it was welcomed in Russia as a new dawn in relations.

The illusions began fading as Mr. Trump or his allies reversed many of those positions one by one, and the attack on Syria pretty much buried them.

On Friday, the rubric on Rossiya 24, the state satellite news channel, for some of the coverage of the attack was “aptain Amerika”mposed over a zombielike figure with dead eyes.

“he rest of the pre-election fog has melted away,”mitri Medvedev, Russia’ prime minister, wrote on his Facebook page. “nstead of the mass-circulated narrative about a joint fight against our main enemy, ISIL, the Trump administration has demonstrated that it will be fiercely fighting the legitimate government of Syria.”

(That Mr. Medvedev responded publicly, but not Mr. Putin, seemed to indicate moderate anger.)

The first consequence on the ground, analysts said, is that Syria and the Russian military will feel less restricted than ever in attacking forces they think are aligned with the West and that they have accused of being terrorists.

Some Syrian rebel groups subsidized by the United States and its regional allies have formed battlefield alliances with fighters from Al Nusra, the affiliate of Al Qaeda in Syria .

“ow Russia in Syria can oppress and destroy opposition forces without regard to the United States and its position,”r. Frolov, the defense analyst, said.

Oleg Matsnev and Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow.

* Dozens of U.S. Missiles Hit Air Base in Syria  

* Russia Suspends Cooperation With U.S. in Syria After Missile Strikes  

* Syria Strike Puts U.S. Relationship With Russia at Risk  

* Weren’ Syria’ Chemical Weapons Destroyed? It’ Complicated  

* Acting on Instinct, Trump Upends His Own Foreign Policy  

* Syria’ ‘onundrum’ Limited Strikes Risk Entrenching Assad’ Strategy  

President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia seems to be burying the idea that he can somehow cooperate with the Trump administration to end the conflict in Syria. | Pool photo by Dmitri Lovetsky.. 

Document NYTFEED020170408ed4800335
