World Watch
World Watch

706 words
18 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CUBA

U.S. Mulls Closing

Embassy in Havana

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. is considering closing its embassy in Cuba in response to what he has described as "health attacks" on American diplomats there that have caused hearing loss, concussions and other symptoms.

The health problems began in December and recurred as recently as August, the State Department has said. The department has confirmed that at least 21 Americans have been affected.

Officials haven't determined a cause of the episodes, but have speculated they came from sonic waves from covert listening devices, though such devices haven't been found.

The State Department hasn't blamed Cuba for the incidents. Cuba is cooperating with an investigation and has denied involvement. U.S. and Cuban officials discussed the incidents in Washington on Friday.

-- Felicia Schwartz

---

EUROPEAN UNION

Views on Tech Taxes

Converge in Estonia

European Union finance ministers on Saturday expressed cautious support to pursue new tax rules for technology giants such as Alphabet Inc.'s Google and Facebook Inc., though they stressed it would be necessary to find a permanent, global solution that includes the U.S.

At a meeting in Tallinn, Estonia, EU finance chiefs agreed to move forward on finding better ways to tax digital services, though some ministers differed on how to proceed.

"Despite some diverging opinions, we eventually came to several common conclusions," said Toomas Toniste, the finance minister of Estonia. "Everyone agreed that the problem exists," he said, referring to inadequate taxation of tech companies.

The push is part of the EU's latest attempt to crack down on what officials see as tax avoidance in Europe and to assure citizens that large companies are paying their fair share.

The EU is seeking to modernize corporate tax rules, which traditionally have been designed on the basis of physical assets and where a company operates. Officials would like to account for virtual operations, such as a search engine selling targeted advertising from data collected in a country where it has no permanent establishment.

-- Natalia Drozdiak

---

IRAQ

ISIS Militants Driven

From Border Area

Iraqi forces expelled Islamic State militants from an area in the western desert near the borders with Syria and Jordan on Saturday, making further inroads into the group's last remaining territory in the country.

The recapture of the area, Akashat, helps secure a newly reopened border crossing with Jordan and will facilitate future operations to clear Islamic State from the rest of the western province of Anbar, Iraqi military officials said.

Iraqi commanders said security forces and allied paramilitaries had faced little resistance from the militants in Akashat, attributing that to the extremist group's low morale after two major defeats in recent months including the loss of its stronghold Mosul.

The Iraqi air force dropped leaflets over Akashat before the assault was launched early in the morning, informing civilians of their imminent "salvation," and issuing an ultimatum to the militants: surrender or be killed.

"Liberating Akashat means securing the international road with Jordan and increasing the pressure on terrorists in western Anbar," Brigadier General Yahya Rasoul, the spokesman for Iraq's joint operations command, told state television.

Western Anbar is one of the last major pockets of territory controlled by Islamic State in Iraq, besides Hawija in the north of the country, which Iraq's army has said it plans to attack soon.

-- Ghassan Adnan and Isabel Coles

---

MALAYSIA

Seven Youths Held

After a Deadly Fire

Police have detained seven youths in connection with a predawn fire at an Islamic boarding school, saying that a verbal dispute between them and students at the school led to an arson attack that killed at least 23 people on Thursday.

Kuala Lumpur Police Chief Amar Singh said Saturday that the suspects, who were between the ages of 11 and 18, would remain in custody while the case was investigated under the penal codes for "mischief by fire" and murder. Mr. Singh said two of the suspects had criminal records. None has been charged.

Twenty-one of the dead were students and two were teachers, trapped in a dormitory with a locked door and window grilles.

-- Yantoultra Ngui

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170918ed9i00022
