World
Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti- ISIS  Strategy; Trump's son-in-law to meet with U.S. and Iraqi officers, get briefed on the fight against Islamic State

By Gordon Lubold 
892 words
3 April 2017
23:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD—resident Donald Trump's senior adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner paid a surprise visit to Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and other officials here Monday, receiving military briefings on the fight against Islamic State.

Mr. Kushner is the first member of the president's inner circle to visit Iraq, a key ally in the fight against Islamic State, since Mr. Trump took office. He was invited here by the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joe Dunford, who is on a routine visit to meet with U.S. and Iraqi commanders and troops.

The visit comes as the Trump administration is assessing the U.S. strategy to combat Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.

According to a statement from Mr. Abadi's office, the two sides discussed the battle in Mosul, international support for Iraq, as well as training and equipment issues.

The U.S. delegation also met with Irfan al-Hayali, the defense minister, and Gen. Othman al-Ghanimi, the chief of staff of the Iraqi forces.

They were joined in those meetings by Tom Bossert, a former administration official under President George W. Bush, now serving as Mr. Trump's homeland security adviser. The men arrived midafternoon and proceeded to a number of back-to-back meetings with Iraqi and U.S. officials, including Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, who is the commander of the coalition effort against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

"As well as receiving briefings and updates, Mr. Kushner is traveling on behalf of the president to express the president's support and commitment to the government of Iraq and U.S. personnel currently engaged in the campaign," said Capt. Greg Hicks, a spokesman for Gen. Dunford.

Later in the evening, Messrs. Kushner, Bossert and Gen. Dunford dined with U.S. Ambassador Douglas Silliman at the sprawling U.S. embassy compound in Baghdad.

Mr. Kushner, 36, a newcomer to foreign-policy issues, has taken an active role as an adviser to Mr. Trump on national security and foreign policy.

Last month, Mr. Kushner made, for a White House official, a rare appearance at the Pentagon, where he met Saudi Arabia's Deputy Crown Prince and Minister of Defense Mohammed bin Salman during his meeting with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.

He has also been influential with his father-in-law on issues pertaining to Mexico and other countries, and he has been given broad authority by his father-in-law to attempt to broker a peace deal between Israel and the Palestinians.

Mr. Kushner, a multimillionaire businessman and developer interested in how technology can reform organizations, launched an innovation office for the White House last week that intends to help reform government.

Mr. Kushner didn't speak with reporters on the trip to Iraq, his first ever here, which was preceded by an overnight stay at a U.S. military base in Germany.

Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford are completing a review of the strategy to fight the group. Mr. Trump signaled during the campaign and since assuming office that he had a plan to accelerate the fight against Islamic State, offering no details about what it might be.

No plan has emerged, and it now falls to Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford to come up with a new strategy. Gen. Dunford declined to discuss what the new strategy would look like. But, according to numerous U.S. officials, the strategy may largely resemble the old one, initiated under President Barack Obama, with tweaks and additions in the margins, U.S. officials said.

Gen. Dunford said he invited Messrs. Kushner and Bossert to join him on the trip some weeks ago so they could see the work troops are doing here, since they will be part of the decision on strategy.

"I think anyone who's involved in the discussion on where we go strategically—aving good situational awareness about what's happening tactically and hear it first hand and unfiltered, how our advisers assess the Iraqi security forces, both the opportunities and the challenges—ill feed into somebody's strategic view," Gen. Dunford told reporters traveling with him on a military jet.

The new strategy, or a refinement of it, may include additional U.S. troops for both Iraq and Syria, possible changes that could put American soldiers closer to the front lines, and an accelerated airstrike campaign.

Under Mr. Obama last fall, the U.S. military had already been given additional authorities which essentially delegated decision making closer to the battlefield.

The visit comes as American and Iraqi troops fight to evict Islamic State militants from the northern Iraqi city of Mosul and prepare for a fight against the group in Raqqa, its self-declared de facto capital in Syria.

Meanwhile, the U.S. military is investigating a series of airstrikes in recent weeks that officials believe may be partly responsible for the deaths of scores of civilians in both Iraq and Syria. There was no new assessment from those investigations, Gen. Dunford said Sunday.

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170403ed43002xl
