FICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
West Meets East

By JOSHUA COHEN 
1,178 words
2 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
17
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

COMPASS

By Mathias Éard

Translated by Charlotte Mandell

447 pp. New Directions. $26.95.

Edward Said, May Peace Be Upon Him, regarded Orientalism as an Occidentalist illusion, and the Orient itself as ''a theatrical stage affixed to Europe'' upon which ''Westerners'' from Flaubert to Napoleon projected their lavish fantasies of violent djinns and nymphomaniacal houris, which were ultimately more revelatory of the psychic yearnings of European culture than of the daily lives of diverse ''Easterners'': Turks, Egyptians, Iranians and Syrians.

Today, nearly 40 years after the publication of ''Orientalism,'' Said's thesis has been elevated to the status of dogma in Western academe, and among Western writers who -- having lost the public imagination and fighting increasingly internecine intellectual skirmishes -- have taken to issuing soft fatwas against one another for the sin of writing from the ''perspective'' or ''experience'' of a person (a fictional person) of another ethnicity or race. Meanwhile, Arabic and Persian writers -- the Others themselves -- keep being jailed, tortured and having their heads cut off.

''Compass,'' Mathias Éard's masterly new novel that attempts to redeem the specter of the Orient (it won the Prix Goncourt in 2015, and was shortlisted this year for the Man Booker International Prize), refers to Said prophet-style, as ''the Great Name.'' After acknowledging that the Palestinian-Manhattanite polymath ''had asked a burning but pertinent question: the relationship between knowledge and power in the Orient,'' the narrator goes on to say, ''I had no opinion, and I still don't, I think; Edward Said was an excellent pianist.''

Which is all that matters -- if not to Éard himself, then to the narrator, an insomniac musicologist named Franz Ritter, who lies bedridden in Vienna, the ''Porta Orientalis,'' fervid with his memories, and an unspecified but assuredly fatal illness. There's no room in Franz's sickroom for debate about what it means ''to appropriate,'' or ''to be appropriate''; his only concern is for beauty, because beauty -- especially nonverbal beauty, musical beauty -- is a foretaste, or forehearing, of Paradise, where we'll all finally speak the same language again, akin to the twittering of birds.

Éard -- the French author of 2012's ''Street of Thieves,'' set during the Arab Spring, and of the widely lauded ''Zone,'' a 2008 novel about Mediterranean Europe, Nazism and the Yugoslav wars presented all in the course of a single train journey, and a single 500-page sentence -- here posits aestheticism not as a political substitute, but as a political ''compass'': If you take pleasure from music, if you're good at performing or, above all, composing good music, then in his cosmology you're innocent, even if you happen to be what the Saidists would call a ''colonizer.''

In ''Compass,'' Orientalism is offered up as a third way or ''alterity'' -- the Orient not a place, even an imaginary place, but a passage, a circumvention of the East-West dialectic. The novel's characters -- modulated from major to minor to major again -- live in literal pipe dreams, which they access through opium, sex, the delirium of infirmity (syphilis or tuberculosis being the historical choice), and an almost fundamentalist submission to the religion of art. The narrator Ritter has written scholarship about how ''revolution in music in the 19th and 20th centuries owed everything to the Orient''; how Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Schöberg, et al. used ''the Other to modify the Self, to bastardize it, for genius wants bastardy.'' He sits up through the night like a donnish Scheherazade, lecturing the darkness on the discredited discipline of Orientalism, through a survey of the careers of the Orientalists he's known: disreputable loners all; emeritus drifters at home nowhere, or only in museums, library archives, and more ancient forms of ruins. There's the Prussian archaeologist and ''madman'' Bilger; the Aryanologist and ''specialist in Arabic coitus'' Faugier; and Ritter's inamorata, his Unsterbliche Geliebte (Immortal Beloved), Sarah, a Jewish Parisienne who has captured his heart (her research interests include legends of medieval European cardiophagy, or heart-eating). As Ritter counts down the clock to morning -- to the sun, which rises in the cardinality of his obsession -- he turns to recounting times past, excavating the precipitous collapse of his profession in the last days ''before Google'' and ISIS, when he and his colleagues still traveled through the region, and lived it up on fieldwork grants in Tehran (until the Islamic Revolution), and Damascus, Aleppo and Palmyra (until the civil war).

Ritter inflects his fictional peregrinations with nonfictional prose-flights concerning musical Orientalism, which read like Thomas Bernhard editing Wikipedia, or a Levantine-themed edition of Grove's Dictionary of Music. Famous names and motifs -- Mozart's Rondo Alla Turca, Beethoven's Marcia Alla Turca -- entwine with excursuses on obscurer maestros: a brief account of Gaetano Donizetti, a composer of bel canto, leads to a biographical sketch of his brother, Giuseppe, who ''introduced European music to the Ottoman ruling classes.'' Occasionally, Ritter's virtuoso solo will take in literature too, but even then his predilections tend to veer from the canon, with ruminations on Robert Musil followed by a portrait of his second cousin Alois Musil, an Austro-Hungarian priest who'd ''set off, on camelback, in the company of a few Ottoman gendarmes 'loaned' by the kaimmakam of Akaba, into the desert to find the famous pleasure castle of Qasr Tuba, which no one had heard of for centuries, except the Bedouins.''

This is where Ritter's Orientalism dovetails with Said's: both are alternative histories of the West, the stifled chronicles of its cravings for emancipation (from liberalism), or escape (from la vie bourgeoise). But while Said meant his thesis in a corrective spirit, Ritter means his as a tragedy -- not least because he's expressing himself in prose, which is a fallen medium. Words, the medium of poetry but also of criticism, have to be translated to be made comprehensible, while music is universally coherent, the expression of pre- or post-verbal emotions in time.

''All art constantly aspires toward the condition of music'': Walter Pater's fusty dictum is a neo-Romantic cri de coeur for Éard. All of his books share the hope of transposing prose into the empyrean of pure sound, where words can never correspond to stable meanings, but can merely indicate the energies underlying an attempt at stabilizing meanings, and the bitterness that ensues when those attempts inevitably fail (even in Charlotte Mandell's resoundingly successful translation). Ritter's record of this pursuit is the record of his pursuit of love -- but of a distant love, a doomed love -- a love that won't be returned; not by Sarah, not by the ''foreign'' cultures he dwells among, and, most grievously, not by music itself. He becomes the bard of a world growing smaller even as its rifts become larger. He's the composer of a discomposing age, lamenting that ''these days only Khomeini talks about love.''

Joshua Cohen's next novel, ''Moving Kings,'' will be published this month.

Mathias Éard (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARC MELKI) 

Document NYTF000020170702ed7200037
