Best of the Web
Opinion
Trump's Bipartisan War Coalition; Almost everybody likes bombing Assad's airfield.

By James Freeman 
1,089 words
7 April 2017
20:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

President Trump's decision to launch missiles against a Syrian airfield on Thursday night is winning the support of politicians across the aisle and across the oceans. Investors also seem to like a more assertive United States. And we have here further proof that Trump foreign policy is much less kind to Russia than the Obama-Clinton variety. But what exactly is Mr. Trump's policy?

Syrian dictator Bashar al-Assad horrified the world this week with his latest chemical assault on his own civilian population. He particularly horrified Mr. Trump, who ordered the U.S. action and later described Assad's atrocity as "slow and brutal death for so many." Mr. Trump added, "Even beautiful babies were cruelly murdered in this very barbaric attack. No child of God should ever suffer such horror."

Mr. Trump's new determination to intervene in Syria may also mark a change in domestic U.S. politics. The self-styled Trump "resistance"—ith its implication that the winner of the 2016 election is somehow akin to an occupying army—ay be losing support among liberal pols. Just a week after the head of the Democratic National Committeesaid that Mr. Trump "didn't win the election," many leading Democrats are treating Mr. Trump like the legitimate President he is and rallying around the commander-in-chief on the issue of an overseas military engagement. Last night Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumersaid: "Making sure Assad knows that when he commits such despicable atrocities he will pay a price is the right thing to do."

House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi wants Congress to debate the limits of Mr. Trump's authority to make war on Assad, but she said that Thursday's attack "appears to be a proportional response to the regime's use of chemical weapons."

CNNnotes "widespread backing" for the U.S. missile barrage among traditional allies overseas. Secretary of State Rex Tillersontold the press last night that "the response from our allies in Europe, as well as the region in the Middle East, has been overwhelmingly supportive of the action we've taken."

Wall Street seems to like it too, as on Friday it has been largely shrugging off the heightened risk of war and even a lousy jobs report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Strong USA. Bullish all markets," texted a hedge fund manager this morning. One could argue that the confirmation of Neil Gorsuch to join the Supreme Court is good news for stocks because consistent rule of law and constitutional governance are good for markets.

But warfare is expensive, risky, and prone to unintended consequences. The Journal notes that the Russian government "swiftly suspended an agreement with Washington for military coordination in Syrian skies on Friday following the U.S. missile attack on a Syrian base, in a new complication for the Trump administration's key priority of fighting Islamic State."

Kicking the [expletive] out of Islamic State seemed to be about the only priority in Syria for Mr. Trump during much of his campaign. But as Mr. Tillerson noted last night, the simple idea of destroying ISIS has given way to something a bit more expansive. Here's Mr. Tillerson describing the new Trump policy on Syria:

"So it's to defeat ISIS; it's to begin to stabilize areas of Syria, stabilize areas in the south of Syria, stabilize areas around Raqqa through ceasefire agreements between the Syrian regime forces and opposition forces. Stabilize those areas; begin to restore some normalcy to them. Restore them to local governance -- and there are local leaders who are ready to return, some who have left as refugees -- they're ready to return to govern these areas. Use local forces that will be part of the liberation effort to develop the local security forces -- law enforcement, police force. And then use other forces to create outer perimeters of security so that areas like Raqqa, areas in the south can begin to provide a secure environment so refugees can begin to go home and begin the rebuilding process. In the midst of that, through the Geneva Process, we will start a political process to resolve Syria's future in terms of its governance structure, and that ultimately, in our view, will lead to a resolution of Bashar al-Assad's departure."

On Thursday the President said, "Tonight, I call on all civilized nations to join us in seeking to end the slaughter and bloodshed in Syria, and also to end terrorism of all kinds and all types." Mr. Trump added that "we hope that as long as America stands for justice, then peace and harmony will, in the end, prevail."

All Americans certainly share that hope. A lot of them also probably want to hear what exactly Mr. Trump is committing them to do in Syria, at what cost and for how long.

Bottom Stories of the Day

Sure, But Did He Dine Alone With Her? "Secret Service Agent on Pence's Detail Suspended After Prostitution Arrest," New York, April 5

Getting to Be a Habit "In January, Susan Rice Assured NPR the Obama Admin Removed Chemical Weapons From Syria," The Weekly Standard, April 6

Russian Plot to Prevent Her From Relating to Average Americans? "Hillary Clinton Explains Why She Really Lost to Trump," NBC News, April 7

If By ‘epublicans' You Mean Jonathan Chait "Before This Is Over, Republicans Are Going to Wish Hillary Clinton Won," New York, April 5

Someone's Going to Have to Break This to Jonathan Chait "Hillary Clinton says she won't run for public office again," Chicago Tribune, April 6

If Only We Could Find a Cheap Local Energy Source "Sign of the times? Solar panels power Kentucky Coal Museum," ABC News, April 6

You Can Outsource That? "Facebook Demands That Its Outside Law Firms Meet 33% Diversity Target That Facebook Does Not Meet," TaxProf Blog, April 4

Mullahs vs. Mothers "No women allowed to run in Iran's first marathon," Times of Israel, April 7

Because The DNC Won't Acknowledge He's the Duly-Elected President? "The real reasons Trump can't work with Democrats," Vox, April 4

Follow James Freeman on Twitter.

Subscribe to the Best of the Web email with one click.

To suggest items, please email best@wsj.com.

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web. Thanks to Irene DeBlasio, Ethel Fenig, Tony Lima, and Wes Van Fleet.)

Document WSJO000020170407ed47007vd
