FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
'What Is It Asking For? To Be Something'

By ELISABETH ZEROFSKY 
6,614 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
50
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On Feb. 2, around a quarter to 5 in the afternoon, just as the day began to darken, police officers approached four young men outside a recording studio in the Rose des Vents, an agglomeration of chalky cité, or public-housing projects, that covers a remote expanse of the northeast Paris suburb Aulnay-sous-Bois. The police asked to see one man's identity papers. Within minutes, another was on his stomach. The officers put handcuffs on the 21-year-old, whose family, of Congolese origin, lived nearby. When they arrived at the station, staff members noticed that he was in a lot of pain. He was rushed to a hospital, where an examination revealed a 10-centimeter tear in his rectum. It had been caused by a police baton.

Nine days later, 3,000 people gathered in the muddy yard in front of the courthouse that serves the ''93'' -- the department to the north and east of Paris that includes Aulnay. Most of the protesters were in their 20s, first- or second-generation French, their parents or grandparents having arrived from Morocco or Mali or Algeria in the 1960s and '70s. Among them was Mehdi Bouteghmè, a 28-year-old city counselor in the neighboring suburb La Courneuve. When news of the incident first spread on social media, where the campaign for the presidential election was also heating up, Bouteghmè took to Facebook. ''In my vision of the Republic, the election campaign should come to a halt,'' he wrote. ''All the candidates should focus on and make a priority of resolving the problem of the role of the police in this country.'' Then he posted the opening lines of ''What Is the Third Estate?'' a tract published by the Abbéieyè in January 1789, that took up the cause of the common classes: ''We have three questions before us. One -- What is the Third Estate? EVERYTHING. Two -- What has it been until now in the political order? NOTHING. Three -- What is it asking for? TO BE SOMETHING.''

The election campaign did not stop; instead Bouteghmè found himself here, surrounded by the citizens he represented. A handful of gendarmes loitered on a steel walkway that ran above the complex, peering down at the crowd. A dozen young men hoisted themselves onto a parapet, fists raised. ''We're finished with this savagery,'' one shouted into a microphone. ''With this violence that's been going on for 30 years. Today you can kill an African, rape an African. Some of you experience daily humiliations. It's a myth, the country of the rights of man. Do you feel like the country respects you?'' The crowd yelled back: ''No!''

The protesters began to sing ''The Marseillaise.'' Someone set off a mortar that burst red into the sky with a pop like gunfire, close enough to shed ash on the crowd. A humming sound floated up from behind. Everyone turned to watch a group of kids rush up the steps of the walkway toward the gendarmes, hurling stones at their riot shields until the officers charged, forcing them back down. A truck belonging to the radio station RTL went up in flames, sending a dark column of smoke skyward. Police reinforcements arrived and set off tear-gas, pushing the crowd out of the courtyard, into the surrounding streets and down into the metro station.

The next morning, newspapers ran pictures of streets filled with fumes and burning cars; inside one, reports said, was a child rescued just in time. Far-right activists took to Twitter to denounce the protesters as savage anarchists. ''Support goes out to police confronting those who take advantage of an unfortunate accident to attack the police and spit on France,'' Marion Maréhal-Le Pen, the niece of the president of the National Front, tweeted. Another party leader wrote, ''Riots in Bobigny -- there you have it: the result of 40 years of mass immigration, judicial cowardice and political blindness.''

I was separated from Bouteghmè in the chaos, and he messaged me later to make sure I got out all right. ''What happened was predictable,'' he said. ''The speeches weren't clear, weren't calming. We need only to be able to communicate in order to make things just a little bit better. But I don't know if it's possible anymore.''

Bouteghmè had gone to the protest with several friends with whom he recently started a new local political party, which they called the Éan Populaire Courneuvien. They had wanted to assert their ability to improve life in their community, even if their ideas tended toward the prosaic and technocratic: making governance more transparent as a way to draw in more local residents; offering incentives to businesses relocating to the banlieues to hire locally rather than bring in commuters; and striking deals with vendors to give food that remained unsold at the end of the day to needy residents. Such preoccupations seemed almost quixotic as explosive demonstrations continued throughout the next few weeks, with more than 50 incidents in 30 towns around the country. Bouteghmè was seized with a dismaying sense of déàu. In 2005, a month of protests rocked La Courneuve and other suburbs, following the deaths of two teenagers, Zyed Benna and Bouna Traoré who were electrocuted in a power station while fleeing police. Thousands of cars were burned, and there were several deaths. Now, even though the election campaign provided an unusual opportunity to be heard, things were unfolding in much the same way: a bold expression of anger, which would surely be followed by inaction.

Soon after the protest, Bouteghmè wrote an op-ed on Bondy Blog, a news site that covers the suburbs, in which he argued that organizations in the banlieues should unite behind a single message: ''That the protests should be qualified as 'riots,' is one thing. ... That they should be emptied of their meaning is another. We are responsible for our own weaknesses ... our silence, our inability to organize in order to act on the things that unify us.'' He was tired of the sense of futility that reigned in the banlieues, the squabbles that prevented his peers from effectively confronting a politically stagnant system. Privately, he was even less sanguine. On Facebook, he sent out a call: ''Is unity even possible?''

The campaign season in France this spring revolved around the meaning of ''Frenchness,'' a perennial question given new urgency by a refugee crisis, terrorist attacks that resulted in the highest number of deaths on French soil since the 1940s, the year-and-a-half-long state of emergency that followed and a generalized economic anxiety. Every week seemed to bring a new polemic about ''mass immigration'' (in reality, France granted refugee status to only 26,000 people who applied in 2016, and the total immigrant population has increased only slightly in the last 10 years) or the role of France's Muslims (estimated at less than 6 percent of the population, half of whom are largely secular) in formulating an Islam compatible with the French Republic or the importance of affirming French ''culture,'' whatever that might be. In one way or another, politicians were often talking about the banlieues, which served as a kind of boogeyman, a stand-in for the social currents unsettling France. Bouteghmè, himself a product of these forces and a consummate proponent of French Republicanism, was, like many of the people he represents, an object of much of this discussion if seldom an equal partner in it.

I met Bouteghmè through a former student with whom I kept in touch after teaching English at a high school in La Courneuve nearly a decade ago. Earlier, I had spent a semester in Paris, studying the French language and way of life, my English girlfriends and I mimicking the proper methods for knotting scarves and pairing wine, to see if we could pass for natives. A month or two after I returned home, the banlieues erupted in the violent protests of 2005. I felt a sense of shame that my frivolous game was in reality an urgent political matter: an invitation to be part of French society was not available to just anyone, particularly if you happened to have non-European, non-Christian roots.

Three years later, I returned to France to teach in La Courneuve, which Nicolas Sarkozy had famously promised to clean up with a ''Karcher,'' a German industrial-strength street-cleansing machine. In the high school where I worked, the election of Barack Obama had generated a new sense, among my students, of what was possible for members of a minority with a complicated historical relationship to their country. But change, symbolic or otherwise, failed to materialize, and by 2014, halfway through Obama's second term, La Courneuve and other suburbs were struggling with a wave of radicalism. While the reasons any one individual may be seduced by jihadism are complex, it was hard to ignore that many of the young French citizens leaving for Syria were coming from the banlieues. And after the terror attacks of 2015 and 2016, whatever sympathy existed in broader French society for the plight of the banlieues seemed to harden into apathy.

La Courneuve's mayor for nearly two decades was Gilles Poux, a stalwart of the French Communist Party, the labor-oriented segment of the French left that once enjoyed broad popularity but whose membership had declined everywhere except in the Paris banlieues. The party took over La Courneuve in the 1950s when the town still had factories producing metalwork and boilers. To Bouteghmè, there was a disconnect between the way things were run and the needs of the people who now lived there. He began to think about running for office. He was 23 and studying philosophy at the Sorbonne. Two years later, he was on the ballot.

He had plenty of ideas. Architecture was a passion, and he had studied urban planning to understand how new buildings might be designed to resist the kind of rapid degradation that plagued the town's infrastructure. He even helped start a program for architecture students in Paris, who could propose ideas for La Courneuve as their final thesis. The results were sometimes outlandish -- one student drafted a blueprint for a perfume museum -- but Bouteghmè still found them useful. ''It makes you dream a bit,'' he said, ''which changes what you can do.''

The mayor encouraged Bouteghmè and his friends to run on his ticket; he needed to join forces with young men of their background to win a majority in a town that has more than 100 nationalities. Once elected, though, they felt constrained by a decades-old political machine. In the fall of 2015, Poux shut down the Samaritain Roma camp in La Courneuve that was home to 300 people; he stated that what was needed was a national, not a local, solution. For months, Bouteghmè had helped organize protests to keep it open, and as it became clear the Roma would not prevail, he worked with local nongovernment organizations to help find temporary squats. He felt that he could no longer share a political identity with the mayor, and he and three others split off to form the Éan Populaire Courneuvien, on the theory that as a bloc they could wield some power. Eventually, one of them might even run against the mayor.

''In the beginning, in my head, identity was important,'' Bouteghmè told me. I met him at an Illy cafe behind the Opéa Garnier in late January, when all the surfaces of the city are darkened from incessant rain. He is tall and unfailingly well put together; that day he had on a navy blue shawl-neck sweater over a pressed white button-down shirt, dark, slim-fitted wool pants and large glasses with clear-plastic frames that were slightly out of tune with his otherwise sober demeanor. We talked for nearly an hour and a half before he smiled for the first time. ''In reality, identity doesn't mean anything,'' he said. What had been, initially, an American-style venture in identity politics led him back to the French Republican ideals of universalism. ''You have a group of people who all look alike, they criticize the old white guys who keep everything to themselves. But then we do the same thing. The Arabs complain about racism, but they're racist toward the Roma. Identity is a trap.''

Bouteghmè's father was born near Constantine, in the Algerian east, in 1950, when the country was still a part of France. He left at 23 for France and met Bouteghmè's mother, a Tunisian, while they were working at a hotel near the Gare de l'Est in Paris. He went back to Algeria, as he always planned, but after a few months he returned to France to be with Bouteghmè's mother. They bought an apartment in La Courneuve, when suburban design was still confidently utopian. Bouteghmè's father eventually became a site manager for a construction company and a union representative. ''He paid for it dearly,'' Bouteghmè told me. ''In front of him were the bosses attacking him, next to him people who deserted him, betrayed him.'' He would negotiate a pay raise, and they would increase everyone's salary except for his. ''My father would always say to me, 'Don't do what I did.' And now I'm living the same thing he lived. Exactly the same.''

The problems facing the suburbs, Bouteghmè asserted, could not be addressed without taking on the larger national malaise. ''For me, today, being named Mehdi Bouteghmè, my father was born in a French colony, my mother was born in a French protectorate, if I want to question the political methods, practices, Republican institutions, people will say I'm an Islamist,'' Bouteghmè told me. ''It's not normal.'' At 18 he joined the Young Muslims of France, a community youth group, and during a phase in college read extensively in Islamic philosophy and theology. Islam was part of his identity, but now, 10 years later, he was certain this would be used against him if he decided to enter national politics. ''They'll attack me, twist positions I may have taken before, activities I might have been involved in in the past,'' he said.

Bouteghmè attended high school in the neighboring suburb Aubervilliers, at the Lycé Henri Wallon, where, in 2003, during his first semester, the Affaire Alma and Lila Léy, which led to the 2004 law banning religious symbols, unfolded. ''In my opinion, that was the breaking point of the Republic,'' he said. That fall, two sisters, daughters of an Algerian mother who was baptized Catholic and an atheist Jewish father, refused to remove the head scarves they had recently begun to wear. The school suspended them for ''ostentatious'' attire that was ''disturbing'' to the public order. ''We had debates about it in the schoolyard,'' Bouteghmè said. ''But with the teachers, there was an incredible racism.'' He went on: ''You crack. It becomes us against them, against those who want nothing of us -- everyone.'' His parents weren't particularly religious, but social dynamics led him, for a time, to delve into Islam. ''I would go around talking about values: 'No, that's no good. No, this is what Islam is.' But people allowed me to make my mistakes, let me evolve, realize my errors. I didn't know who I was yet. Today, if you're an 18-year-old kid, you talk about Islam like that, you go straight to prison.''

Reading Kant and Machiavelli helped Bouteghmè look beyond what could be a closed circuit in the banlieues. ''France is philosophy,'' he told me. It was only through understanding the foundational principles of French Republicanism, and 200-year-old ideas that were in crisis in a modern, multicultural France, that he could see they needed to be adjusted to a new reality. One of his teachers wanted him to try to qualify for the Éole Nationale d'Administration, France's ultra-elite finishing school for the haute fonctionnaire class; Bouteghmè didn't know what it was. He took the exam to enter Sciences Po, a prestigious feeder school to the E.N.A. Most students spend several years in a preparatory course; Bouteghmè had prepared on his own. It wasn't enough. His parents weren't keen on his studying philosophy, impractical as it was, and friends from La Courneuve tried to dissuade him, too -- studying Western, Christian-based philosophy was, they warned, haram, forbidden. (Everyone in La Courneuve had been affected by fundamentalism, even if there had been fewer departures for Syria from here than from neighboring towns.)

To Bouteghmè, the hysteria in France about Islam, on display most recently in the ''burkini'' controversy, smacked of the anti-Semitism of the '30s. ''They are attacking people who don't represent what people are saying they represent,'' he said. Women in head scarves had become symbols, flash points, everything except individuals with complicated personal reasons for expressing themselves in a particular way. Even for the people who did turn to fundamentalism, religion was often a question of economic and political exclusion. Solve the economic problems -- find people jobs, help them educate their families -- the ''woman question'' would resolve itself.

The banlieues have a singular geographic and demographic makeup. There are the town centers, whose residents tend to be wealthier and more European in origin, and there are the stereotypical, gargantuan Le Corbusier-inspired buildings. Constructed primarily in the 1960s and subjected to an urban-renewal program in the '80s that involved demolishing some developments on live television, most were built for the city's working-class population, which exploded after World War II, and later housed the foreign guest workers who arrived around the same time.

In the 1960s, there were more than 80 bidonvilles, or shantytowns, sheltering an estimated 30,000 guest workers from Spain, Portugal, North Africa and elsewhere, often organized by country or region; Algerians from Oran, for example, would live together. But La Campa in La Courneuve, one of the poorest, was always a mix of nationalities, as the architectural historian Jacob Paskins details in a recent book, ''Paris Under Construction,'' and it often accommodated those rejected from their ethnic bidonvilles. The town has maintained that diversity, though its composition is always changing -- from Italian and Spanish, to Algerian and Tunisian, to, most recently, Chinese and Pakistani. Sunday is market day, and when you emerge from the subway into the commercial plaza, its sidewalks crammed with tents and pedestrians, it's as if the entire borough of Queens had been squeezed into a single roundabout. You will hear Urdu and Tamil, Portuguese and Romanian, Wolof, Bambara and Sango, and as many dialects of Arabic as exist in the world. ''No one here is French,'' an Algerian municipal worker in a hot orange vest and aviator sunglasses, told me. You could buy goods there to feed, clothe and clean an entire household for a week for under 50 euros: bins of Polish leather slippers and nude-colored bras, cake pans, memory-foam pillows and child's dresses in turquoise leopard print, as well as Egyptian sweet potatoes, Moroccan mint and Italian fennel.

A 20-minute walk to the other side of town brings you to the Citées 4000, a cluster of towers that opened in 1962. Its barren landscaping and roadways are dotted with construction sites. The area has undergone a series of renovations since 2005, when the government enacted a ''plan for social cohesion.'' ''Sarkozy said he would clean it with a Karcher, and he did,'' Kamel Hamza, a conservative member of the La Courneuve City Council, told me. Hamza and his colleague Mustapha Benlafkih belong to Sarkozy's center-right party, Les Réublicains, a rare species in the banlieues, though less and less so. They offered to drive me around the 4000 in Benlafkih's gray Peugeot. ''You can see the sun now,'' Benlafkih said, pointing westward. The government had knocked down a massive tower built to house repatriated pieds-noirs (Europeans living in Algeria who were forced to leave during the war of independence) and replaced it with smaller rowhouses and apartment buildings. There were a few stores -- a supermarket, a Muslim butcher, a discount bazaar and Billy Exotique: Spéialité Africaines. But because residents could stay in the area without ever having to go to the livelier part of town with the cafes and kebab shops, Hamza said, the problems that destroying the towers was meant to address -- high unemployment, social isolation, the exhausting complications of poverty -- remained.

Decades of rule by the Communist Party had failed to help the situation, Hamza said. The local government doled out aid, public housing and jobs, on which the people were dependent; they became leftist voters for life; and the government could coast. Some residents hadn't left their cité in 30 years. ''You have to show them that people live better elsewhere,'' Hamza said. ''There are choices. Happiness is not La Courneuve.''

The French are obsessed with preventing ''communautarisme'' -- any division of the Republic into individual identity groups -- but if such a things exists, it is as much a result of city planning as cultural politics. People living in the older, wealthier centers of suburbs like La Courneuve sometimes regard newcomers with suspicion. First-generation French-born citizens of North African descent see businesses that used to be Italian and Tunisian becoming Pakistani and grow alarmed that things aren't as they were, that they are no longer ''chez nous'': a phrase that happens to echo a slogan of the National Front.

In a strange turn, the National Front has been gaining ground in the banlieues. In the 2014 European elections, the party came in first in more than half the towns in the 93. The party's candidate in La Courneuve came in second in the first round of the regionals in 2015. And in the first round of the presidential election, on April 23, Marine Le Pen won 11.6 percent of the vote in La Courneuve, coming in third. In some ways, the change reflects a larger trend: former strongholds of the left deserting the Socialist Party, whose leadership proved impotent over the last five years, for the economic protectionism and strong sense of identity of the National Front.

In Noisy-le-Grand, in the southeastern part of the 93, where nine people were arrested after the February demonstrations, I attended a National Front meeting at the back of a strip mall. Most of the hundred or so attendees were middle-aged or older; as at any National Front gathering, there was a lot of black leather and tattoos and a few ''FDNY'' T-shirts. But the party's representative for the 93 is Jordan Bardella, a suave 21-year-old who is always dressed in a suit and has established himself on social media as the guardian of social order in the banlieues. Bardella opened the meeting with a rousing address. ''The imminent revolution at the center of Marine's presidential program is first and foremost a daily battle that begins in our communities,'' he said. The attendees were the working-class ''linchpin'' of the party, who cohabitated the ''lawless zones'' that had put France into a state of ''submission.''

After the meeting, over plastic cups of orange Fanta, I met Sandrine Abdelkader, an effervescent security guard in her 40s from Aubervilliers with long blond hair. She had been a Socialist her whole life. Now there was no question: She would vote Le Pen. ''When you go into the cité, and you're white, you're French, you're treated like a slut,'' she told me. (In December, the TV station France 2 ran a news segment that followed two women with a hidden camera into a de facto all-male cafe in Sevran, where they appeared to be unwelcome, setting off a national uproar about ''no-go zones'' and women's rights.) ''It's true, there are cafes in Aubervilliers where, as a woman, I can't set foot inside,'' Abdelkader, who is half German, half North African, said. ''And I have North African roots, that's the worst part. The cité are about to explode. They're closed off. There's a foreign diktat. And a mentality that isn't ours. It's not our culture.'' I asked Abdelkader how Le Pen would solve these problems. ''First of all by redefining who we are,'' she said. ''Where we come from. Are we capitalists before all else? Or are we people born in a country with traditions, with a culture? We've forgotten who we are. So foreigners come in and they say: 'We're Maghréin, we're Muslim, but what are you? You're nothing.' ''

During the run-up to the election, Emmanuel Macron, the 39-year-old former economy minister, then the front-runner and now the president, declared there was no such thing as ''a French culture'' but rather ''culture in France,'' which is ''diverse.'' His remark provoked a delirious backlash. Françis Fillon belittled Macron for daring to deny Descartes, Molièe, Chateaubriand and Proust, as well as the educators who ''teach our children to speak the language of France, rather than that of the streets.'' ''If there's no French culture,'' Fillon concluded, ''then why is there France?''

The politics of French culture now seem intrinsic to the country's sense of itself, but it wasn't until the early 1980s, as Vincent Martigny, a political scientist at the Éole Polytechnique, notes in a new book, ''Dire la France,'' that ''culture'' became mixed with ''national identity.'' It was a theme of Françis Mitterrand's Socialist Party, a bid to recapture power. ''Without knowing it, they engendered a monster they could not control,'' Martigny says. The far-right took up the theme and unity became confused with uniformity. ''There is a gap between civic culture, the culture of the Republic, which is defending the principles of France, and the majority culture,'' he says. ''People think 'real France' is like us. It's not all these other people: 'Yeah, it's good if they claim that they are French, but they're not white, they're not from Christian families, they don't come from a small village, we don't have enough dead people buried in the same cemeteries.' ''

Kamel Hamza found himself exasperated by this ''civilizationist'' discourse. ''France is not just cathedrals,'' he said. ''They say they are secular, but today you have certain people preaching the France of cathedrals. My parents arrived in the 1960s, they helped build the country, they fought to defend it. I can't cut off this history from one day to the next in the name of a patriotism that, in fact, doesn't exist. I don't want to be the same as a French person from the north, and they don't want to be the same as me. What brings us together is not physical appearance or a religion, but the values of the Republic.'' What was funny, he said, was that in La Courneuve, a town with a constant flux of immigrants, Hamza and his peers, first-generation French of North African origin, had become the anchors of Republicanism. ''We are the new French in the neighborhoods that the françis de souche fled,'' he said, referring to those of longstanding French lineage. ''It's we who defend French traditions here. Whereas you go to other towns, and they call you a fundamentalist.''

For decades the far right has been obsessed with a speech that the Algerian revolutionary leader Houari Boumediene supposedly gave in the 1970s, in which he predicted that one day the famished masses would travel from the south to the north in a wave of immigration that would be ''neither fraternal nor pacifist.'' France has been so transformed by terrorism -- more than 230 deaths over nine attacks since 2015 -- that a significant part of the intellectual and cultural establishment is now comfortably aligned with the far right. The Figaro columnist Éic Zemmour, a ubiquitous presence on TV and a top-selling nonfiction writer, asserted that the French Army has a secret plan, called Operation Brambles, to clear out Muslims from the suburbs, developed in consort with Israeli military specialists who refined their technique in Gaza. The ostensibly liberal feminist Éisabeth Badinter recently denounced in an introduction to ''France in Submission,'' a collection of testimonies from local politicians and civil servants about their battles with Islam, the ''separatism, indeed secession'' sought by elements of society, and she encouraged the French to fight against ''those who aspire to impose their laws and values on us.''

In early March I attended a conference dedicated to de-Islamizing Europe. It was organized by a Catholic activist group and held in Béiers, a southern town whose famously provocative mayor, Robert Méard, warmly welcomed the attendees. The conference offered a daylong workshop in which to learn how to become a ''vector'' in society to fight against a plot cooked up by Islamic nations to set up colonies across Europe, by way of European Muslims, who were adherents of Sharia law. In attendance were a number of local officials from across the south, people who considered Marine Le Pen a liberal and were sworn devotees of her father. But there was also a couple sitting behind me who supported Fillon. They lived in Figeac, a small town north of Toulouse, and they had observed worrisome changes there over the last decade. There was more drug dealing, more crime, more incivility. The solution, they said, was to fight the spread of Islam.

More than elsewhere in France, apathy toward the presidential election was potent in the banlieues. Even if Marine Le Pen won, some Courneuviens said, well, things couldn't get much worse. The state of emergency had deepened social divisions. Everywhere in Paris, soldiers stalked the streets in tight quadrangles, assault rifles at the ready. A high-school teacher wrote in Libéation that while taking her students on a field trip, three of the five boys in the group were asked for their papers by the police; she had a feeling it wasn't a coincidence that one was of Moroccan origin, one Malian and one Comorian. One teacher from the banlieue told me that because of the state of emergency, he was not permitted to take a large group of students on public transport into central Paris. With the high cost of renting a bus, they organized trips elsewhere in the suburbs. He later discovered that students attending high school within the city limits faced no such restrictions.

The ambivalence that many residents of La Courneuve exhibited toward the presidential campaign was reciprocated. Most of the candidates on the left made some effort to meet with organizations and businesses in the suburbs, but the candidates on the right mostly didn't bother. Marine Le Pen suggested that many of the terrorist attacks of the last few years could have been prevented by getting rid of ''the birthright,'' automatic citizenship for anyone born on French soil.

Fighting a sense of inertia, Bouteghmè and the Éan Populaire Courneuvien decided to organize a grand déat for the banlieues, five days ahead of the first round of voting. They invited each of the presidential candidates to send a representative to La Courneuve, a request to which most of the left-leaning ones and none of the right-leaning ones assented. On a chilly Tuesday evening, in a meeting room on the ground floor of an Escheresque 1970s-era cité Bouteghmè was setting up a sound system. By 7 p.m., when the debate was to begin, only four people had shown up. The debaters dutifully introduced themselves. Most were from marginal parties on the eclectic French left that everyone knew would never win. But Emmanuel Macron had sent his representative for the 93, Alexandre Aïara, a polished man of Senegalese origin. Dozens of people trickled in, and by 8:30 it was clear that they had come to have their say with Aïara, who delivered Macron's ideas in clean bullet points: For each person hired from the banlieues, a company would be relieved of certain taxes; companies that discriminated would be subjected to a public ''naming and shaming'' campaign; and so on.

An activist named Salima Yenbou was there, representing Jean Lassalle, the eccentric founder of something called the Resist! party. Yenbou grew up in Aulnay-sous-Bois, where the supposed police assault took place in February, and had a broad view of the traps laid by the ''banlieue question'' in French civic life. ''We talk about the residents in a condescending manner: insertion, integration, security, antiracism, equality of opportunity,'' Yenbou said to the audience. ''No one wants to come right out and say that here in France, one of our values, the second value of the country, equality, is in tatters.'' She was disturbed by the incessant calls to ''integrate,'' which she had been asked to do for the entirety of her 40 years. ''No matter what I do, no matter what I say, I don't even have the right to criticize my country,'' Yenbou continued. ''You know what someone said to me once?'' She had been at a teachers' conference and the panelists were talking about gender equality, four men and one woman. ''So I leaned over to my neighbor and said as a joke, 'They're very funny, they're talking about gender equality, there's four men and one woman.' Do you know what she said to me? She led me out and said very nicely, 'Do you think that gender equality exists in Morocco or Algeria?' ''

The remark made Yenbou want to cry. ''Why,'' she said, ''are you talking to me about Algeria and Morocco, I'm talking about my country, France. I was born French, my parents were born French, it became Algeria later on, my grandparents were French, my great-grandparents were French, and I ask again: I don't have the right to criticize France, my country?'' She realized that these kinds of reactions were not fully conscious, but that didn't make them excusable. ''Values'' were something that only the country's minorities were required to prove they understood. ''It's necessary that the idea of equality be taken into account, by everyone,'' Yenbou said. ''There was a directive for teachers to talk about the values of the Republic in school, O.K. But when I learned that in the rich neighborhoods, teachers don't talk about values, what did they tell me? They said, 'But there's no problem with Republican values here -- they know them.' Well, what about equality? Who will talk to these children in the rich neighborhoods about discrimination? Who will tell them that in our country, equality isn't real?''

Bouteghmè was pleased with the way the debate had gone -- more than one shouting match erupted -- but he knew it wouldn't necessarily get more Courneuviens out to vote. And he understood why. In the end, they knew that none of the candidates would offer them much. In 2012, Françis Hollande dangled numerous promises during his presidential campaign, including the right to vote in local elections for foreigners who had been in France and paying taxes for years; once the banlieues helped elect him, they heard little until the November 2015 ISIS-led attacks in central Paris, when Hollande proposed a terrorism-related constitutional amendment that would effectively turn dual nationals into second-class citizens. His promise to lower the national unemployment rate hadn't fared much better; in five years, and especially in the banlieues where the rate was far higher, the numbers had hardly budged.

The Courneuviens I spoke with that weekend didn't hold out much hope for Macron. They were convinced he would turn out to be a continuation of Hollande, or worse. Legislative elections in June would determine whether Macron would be able to garner the power in Parliament to change the country's economy as he said he would; Bouteghmè feared what Macron's plans to loosen regulations would do to the safety net, but he was loath to join the opposition of the aging far-left leader Jean-Luc Mééchon, who conducted politics as a personality cult and could be just as hostile to multiculturalism as other politicians of his generation. And if Le Pen won, well, one resident wondered whether it would ''be possible to see the bad among the bad.'' Deciding between the two candidates, he said, was ''like being asked to choose your own death.''

Emmanuel Macron and Marine Le Pen came in first and second respectively, and, two weeks later, on the Saturday before the final runoff, the neighborhood association that Bouteghmè works for organized a Fêe de la Cité a kind of spring block party for families in La Courneuve. It was raining on that early May afternoon, and when I arrived, Bouteghmè was soaked, his hair dripping and his T-shirt weighted down with water, but he was smiling. Kids were performing acrobatics on uneven bars with the help of a coach and jumping around with an inflatable sumo wrestler, pausing to eat skewers of strawberry-and banana-shaped marshmallows. These children, many of them first-generation French-born, were playing in a small park between several citéowers. The symbolism was almost too stark: The towers blocked the view of Paris -- they couldn't see it, and it couldn't see them.

For Bouteghmè, a Le Pen presidency would have endangered the entire Republican system, limiting his capacity to work for reforms that would bring Courneuviens inside French institutions. When Macron pulled through that evening, with 66 percent of the vote, he was relieved: not because he was optimistic about Macron -- the percentage of blank ballots in the banlieues was high -- but because it meant at least that his work could continue. At various points, he thought he might be wasting his time; he could have joined Macron's movement when a recruiter sought him out, or the Green Party. But he kept coming back to the original idea of the Éan Populaire Courneuvien. For him, French history explained what was happening. ''We had the revolution, then we had the Terror, then the return of the Republic, and then the empire,'' Bouteghmè said. ''And a lot of movements have been born that way, all of which started with the Enlightenment. But there was a lot of stumbling. After that was the generation of Kant, who provided a message, then Hegel, Marx, and then a lot happened in France post-Marx and post-Communism.'' Bouteghmè planted himself squarely within the history that much of the country saw as an impassable chasm between themselves and him. ''Marx allowed something to happen,'' Bouteghmè added. ''But it took 100 years. So maybe it will take 100 years for us to have a place here.''

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Elisabeth Zerofsky is a freelance writer living in Paris. This is her first article for the magazine.

Above: Supporters of Emmanuel Macron distributed pamphlets in La Courneuve in April. Right: Scenes in La Courneuve. (MM50-MM51); Mehdi Bouteghmè, a city councilor in La Courneuve, a suburb outside Paris. (MM53); A sign supporting Emmanuel Macron in La Courneuve. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ALEX MAJOLI/MAGNUM, FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM55) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b0007m
