World
Iran's Stature Grows as Rivals Quarrel; Crisis in Qatar and advances by Shiite proxies against Islamic State boost Tehran's influence

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
895 words
13 July 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

It's been more than five months since President Donald Trump declared that he was putting Iran "on notice."

For the Iranian regime, that is turning out to be a rather comfortable place.

While the Trump administration is still formulating its Iran and Syria policies, a series of international events have combined to bolster Iran's influence, at least for now.

Top among them is the crisis over Qatar, which erupted days after Mr. Trump's high-profile trip to a summit in Riyadh in May. Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt have shut their embassies in Qatar, closed borders and banned travel and trade with the emirate.

The conflict has already turned what used to be a two-way confrontation between the Saudi-led Sunni axis and the Iran-led Shiite camp into a three-way regional fracture that offers fresh strategic opportunities for Tehran.

"The Saudi effort to build a consensus against Iran in the region has hit the rocks with Qatar. This split is something that Iran is enjoying," said Hassan Ahmadian, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic Research think tank in Tehran. "Iran's ruling elite likes it and believes that the future stability of the region is better served by having more than two axes confronting one another."

In fact, the measures the Saudis and their allies have adopted against Qatar are sometimes harsher than their policies toward Iran. The U.A.E. and Iran, for example, maintain diplomatic and trade relations, and extensive air links.

With regional heavyweight Turkey taking Qatar's side, the collapse of the Sunni alliance isn't the only good news for Tehran. The growing alienation between the Trump administration and European nations, particularly Germany and France, is also making any new concerted international effort to pressure Iran increasingly unlikely.

Some Iranian leaders appreciate this trans-Atlantic discord "as giving Iran some short-term advantages and breathing space," said Brian Katulis, a senior fellow at the Center for American Progress, a think tank close to the Democrats, who recently participated in informal discussions with Iranian representatives. "America looks distracted and unfocused—nd besides the rhetoric of putting Iran 'on notice' and a few tactical policy shifts, Iran right now seems to see the gap between Trump's bluster and actions."

This month, France's Total SA said it would push ahead with a $1 billion investment into Iran's South Pars gas field, the first major injection of Western money since international sanctions against Iran were lifted as part of a nuclear agreement last year. Iran and Qatar share ownership of this gas field, the world's largest.

Iran's position has strengthened, too, in the Middle East's actual battlefields. In Iraq and Syria, advances by Iran's Shiite proxies against Islamic State and moderate Sunni rebels are making possible the establishment of an overland "resistance highway" that would link, through friendly territory, Tehran to Damascus and Beirut for the first time since the Syrian war began in 2011—a major geopolitical gain.

The war in Yemen remains at a stalemate, at great cost to Saudi Arabia and the U.A.E. The Iranian-backed Hezbollah Shiite militia keeps consolidating its influence over the Lebanese state. Even the low-grade Shiite insurgency in parts of eastern Saudi Arabia has flared up of late.

The Saudi-led campaign against Qatar, meanwhile, has allowed Tehran to improve its relationship with the embattled emirate—and with Qatar's main ally, Turkey. Both nations have long backed Sunni rebels fighting against Iranian allies in Syria, a support that could diminish as a result of the current Gulf crisis.

"In the recent past, each time Saudi Arabia has downsized or frozen its relations with an Arab country, such as Lebanon and Iraq, this has presented Iran an opportunity to strengthen its relations to the local actors at a detriment to Saudi Arabia," said Ellie Geranmayeh, senior policy fellow at the European Council on Foreign Relations.

While Iran and the Qatar-Turkey camp agree on some key regional issues, such as support for the Palestinian Islamist movement Hamas, their rapprochement can go only so far, of course. Turkey and Qatar remain military allies of the U.S., and Turkey in particular views itself as Iran's geopolitical rival and equal. The Sunni Islamist ideology of the Muslim Brotherhood, a Pan-Islamic group that is backed by Turkey and Qatar alike, is also fundamentally at odds with Iran's Shiite theocratic doctrine.

This means that Iran's overriding interest is for both sides of the Qatar crisis to get bruised by the dispute.

"In the long term, both the Muslim Brotherhood and Wahhabism, which is the basis of Saudi Arabia's kingdom, don't accept Shiites as Muslims," said Mohammad Eslami, an Iranian commentator and a fellow at Mofid University in Iran. "And both believe that they should control the power of Iran in the region."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com

Related coverage

* Rex Tillerson, Mediating Gulf Dispute, Signs Antiterrorism Pact With Qatar

* Iran Poised to Gain as \b ISIS\b0  Falls in Mosul

* Syria's Newest Flashpoint Is Bringing U.S. and Iran Face to Face

Document WSJO000020170713ed7d00108
