U.S. News: Funds Sought for Military,  ISIS  Fight

By Ted Mann and Jeffrey Sparshott 
459 words
17 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The White House is seeking $30 billion in added funding this year for the military and its campaign against Islamic State, in addition to the $54 billion in new defense spending it wants for next fiscal year.

The Trump administration, in a supplemental budget request to Congress released Thursday, also seeks $3 billion for the Department of Homeland Security, to be used for border security -- including $1.4 billion to begin work on the administration's proposed wall along the southern border.

The administration released two budget outlines Thursday: one for the remainder of fiscal 2017 and one for the 2018 fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1.

Under the $30 billion supplemental request for 2017, the military budget would grow by $24.9 billion to address what the administration calls "critical budget shortfalls," including in manpower and munitions. The request also includes $5.1 billion in contingency spending to support operations aimed at defeating Islamic State and assisting the government of Afghanistan in its campaign against the Taliban.

The administration asks Congress to make $18 billion in cuts from the nondefense discretionary budget this year. That amount fully offsets the proposed increases in homeland-security funding and half of the increase in military funding, the White House said.

Aiming to balance increases in military spending with requests to cut domestic programs mirrors the administration's approach to the 2018 federal budget. The Trump administration is asking Congress for a $54 billion increase in spending on defense-related programs, with corresponding cuts to nonmilitary agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Department of Health and Human Services.

The White House says the additional Pentagon funding would help develop "a comprehensive, whole-of-Government strategy to stop ISIS from posing a threat to the United States by funding critical efforts to strike ISIS targets, support our partners fighting on the ground, disrupt ISIS's external operations, and cut off its flows of financing."

Included in the increase to the base Pentagon budget is $13.5 billion for procurement of military equipment, including jet fighters, helicopters, missiles and air-defense systems. The supplemental request also would provide the remainder of the funding for a DDG-51 destroyer, for which Congress provided only partial funding in 2016, the administration said.

An additional $7.2 billion would go toward plugging gaps in military readiness and to support cyberwar and intelligence operations. The White House is weighing in on the final months of 2017 in part because Congress still hasn't finished appropriations -- current spending legislation funds the government only through April 28.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170317ed3h0001t
