World News: Syria Officials Dispute Account by U.S. of Attack

By Raja Abdulrahim, Noam Raydan and Ben Kesling 
707 words
20 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Syrian regime and its militia allies said Friday that their forces were attacked by the U.S.-led coalition while they were fighting Islamic State, an assertion the U.S. dismissed as false.

The coalition on Thursday launched a rare airstrike against pro-regime forces to halt their advance toward U.S.-backed rebels operating along the border with Jordan in southeastern Syria. The elite rebel force based in al-Tanf, Maghaweer al-Thawra, is planning to advance northward to take territory along the Syrian-Iraqi border and divide land under Islamic State control, rebels in the group said.

But rebels said the pro-regime forces were trying to cut the rebels off and insert themselves into the battle against Islamic State, aiming to shore up longstanding claims by the Syrian government that it is leading the fight against terrorism in the six-year-old conflict.

"This is all part of the scramble for eastern Syria that has been sparked by the imminent collapse or defeat of ISIS," said Joshua Landis, director of the Center for Middle East Studies at the University of Oklahoma. "This is the first time that America has intentionally attacked Syrian forces in a contest for control of Syrian land."

While proving that it is fighting terrorism is part of the regime's calculations in its battlefield movements, Mr. Landis said it is really about control of Syria.

"Syria has to be worried about America setting up a proxy rebel force to control this area," he said.

The Syrian government condemned the U.S. attack and said it was fighting terrorism, adding no one has the right to dictate how the regime should fight "terrorist organizations" such as Islamic State and al Qaeda. Though the regime insists it is fighting terrorism, it has focused most of its airstrikes and artillery attacks on antigovernment rebels over the years.

In Washington, the Pentagon said Friday that the regime-led troops it targeted Thursday weren't near Islamic State forces and that the U.S. action was required for defensive purposes.

The Trump administration has shown more willingness to use force against Bashar al-Assad in Syria.

The Pentagon took strikes on one of Mr. Assad's air bases in April in response to a chemical-weapons attack U.S. officials attributed to the regime.

Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis said Friday this week's actions were self-defense strikes that the coalition troops took to protect themselves.

He also cited changes to the U.S.-led campaign against Islamic State approved by President Donald Trump, saying the U.S. military has assumed more authority from the White House and has refined its tactical approach.

Mr. Mattis said the president had given U.S. military commanders more leeway to make battlefield decisions themselves and approved a tactical shift that directs U.S.-backed troops to focus on annihilating Islamic State rather than waging a war of attrition.

"No longer will we have slowed decision cycles because Washington, D.C., has to authorize tactical movements on the ground," Mr. Mattis said at a news conference, where he appeared alongside Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen. Joe Dunford and the State Department's special envoy to the anti-Islamic State coalition, Brett McGurk.

Mr. Mattis said U.S.-backed troops previously were surrounding Islamic State positions and allowing enemy fighters to escape through a designated exit route, because the goal was to oust them from occupied cities as quickly as possible and allow residents to return. But the effect, the defense secretary said, was essentially to move the Islamic State fighters around the area.

Mr. McGurk cited the recent capture of the Tabqa Dam in Syria by a U.S.-backed alliance of Kurdish and Arab fighters as an example of the new battlefield leeway leading to quicker execution.

Mr. McGurk said some 55,500 square kilometers of territory had been liberated and 4.1 million people freed from Islamic State control since the campaign began in mid-2014.

---

Paul Sonne and Nour Alakraa contributed to this article.