US
Trump Administration Urges Congress to Retain 2001 War Powers Law; State, Defense heads travel to Capitol Hill to brief on position on authorization

By Byron Tau 
893 words
2 August 2017
22:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he Trump administration on Wednesday told Congress it didn't need a revision of the law underpinning the global war on terrorism and ongoing armed conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan, arguing the Pentagon already has the legal authority it needs under a war authorization passed shortly after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

In a letter to the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, a State Department official said that the administration "is not seeking revisions" the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists, also known as an AUMF, nor is it seeking additional congressional authority to fight terrorist groups across the globe.

"The United States has sufficient legal authority to prosecute the campaign against al Qaeda and associated forces, including against Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)," wrote Charles Faulkner, an official with the State Department's bureau of legislative affairs, to Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.).

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis also traveled to Capitol Hill Wednesday to brief the Foreign Relations committee on the administration's position on the AUMF. Emerging from the classified meeting, members of both parties said they believed they could work with the administration to find an acceptable compromise.

"The administration's not seeking an AUMF," Mr. Corker said. But "they wouldn't be opposed to one that was written in the appropriate way," he said. "I'm confident they'll work us."

Objections from President Donald Trump's administration to a renewed war powers debate could stymie efforts in Congress to revise and re-evaluate the legal authority governing U.S. military action against terrorist groups. After more than 15 years of conflict across more than a dozen countries, representatives and senators of both parties support repealing the 2001 AUMF and replacing it with a law tailored to current conflicts.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has deferred to the White House on the issue of new war powers, saying he would be willing to consider it if the president felt it was necessary, even as many on Capitol Hill are calling for Congress to update the war powers laws.

"I'd be interested in taking a look at an AUMF if the president feels like he needs it," the Kentucky Republican said in April. "If the president can think of some AUMF that he thinks will strengthen his hand, I will take a look at it."

Under the Constitution, Congress alone has the authority to declare war. The 2001 AUMF authorized military action against the groups responsible for the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks as well as their affiliates. A year later, Congress authorized the war in Iraq in a separate AUMF. Both remain in effect, while Congress debates whether to repeal the Iraq resolution completely and replace the 2001 AUMF.

Together, the two laws have provided the legal basis for nearly every sustained military action the U.S. has taken in recent years. But since the Sept. 11 attacks, the nature of the war on terror has evolved far beyond what the law envisioned—or example ISIS, which the U.S. is fighting directly and by advising Iraqi troops, didn't exist when the 2001 AUMF was passed.

"It's absurd, using the 2001 authorization for the current military campaign against ISIS," said Sen. Ben Cardin of Maryland, the top Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

In June, a group of House Republicans and Democrats voted to repeal the 2001 AUMF through an amendment to an appropriations bill in part to force Congress to debate a new AUMF. The repeal measure was later stripped from the bill by House leadership, who said a spending bill wasn't the proper way to debate war powers.

In the Senate, a bipartisan bill introduced in May by Sens. Jeff Flake (R., Ariz.) and Tim Kaine (D., Va.) would have specifically authorized the conflict against Islamic State, repealing both the 2001 and 2002 AUMFs in the process. The proposal is similar to a House bill authored by Rep. Adam Schiff (D., Calif.) in 2015. Several GOP-led House and Senate committees are examining the issue of a new AUMF.

"When I voted in 2001 to authorize military force against the perpetrators of the Sept. 11 attacks, I had no idea I would be authorizing armed conflict for more than 15 years, and counting. It is past time for Congress to voice its support for the war against ISIS," said Mr. Flake about his proposal.

Former President Barack Obama twice asked Congress to pass new AUMFs to address the changing nature of U.S. military action, though he continued to rely on those authorizations. Ultimately, members of Congress couldn't agree on details of the AUMF and the proposals never advanced.

Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Trump Signs Russia Sanctions Bill He Calls 'Seriously Flawed' (Aug. 2)

* Pence Says U.S. Won't Hold Talks With North Korea (Aug. 2)

* As Washington Churns, the World Grows More Dangerous (July 31)

* White House Looks at Scaling Back U.S. Military Presence in Afghanistan (July 30)

* Trump Administration Slaps Iran With Additional Sanctions (July 18)

Document WSJO000020170802ed820050l
