World News: Iraq Set to Move On  ISIS  Redoubt

By Ben Kesling and Ghassan Adnan 
398 words
22 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Iraq's army launched an offensive to drive Islamic State from the town of Hawija, one of the group's few remaining strongholds in the country and a hub it uses to threaten the oil-rich city Kirkuk and Iraq's semiautonomous Kurdish region.

The operation on Thursday comes days after Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi announced the military had begun clearing the militants from areas that remain under their control in Anbar province, some along the Syrian border. The dual offensives mark one of the final steps in the campaign to oust Islamic State from Iraq.

"Hawija provides a strategic position and a main source for Daesh funding," counterterrorism forces spokesman Sabah al-Noman said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Hawija is used by the group as a center to build explosives including car bombs, and to launch attacks on surrounding areas including Mosul. It is also home to four Islamic State training camps, Mr. Noman said.

The town "now comes second in significance only to Raqqa in Syria," he said, referring to the group's de facto capital in Syria, which is under assault from an array of Syrian and Kurdish forces.

Mr. Abadi, announcing the start of the Hawija operation, called it "a fulfillment to our pledge to our people to liberate all Iraqi lands and cleanse them from Daesh terrorist gangs."

Iraqi troops are pushing through the outskirts of Hawija, which once had a population of over 400,000 people but is now home to just 45,000. Troops are expected to begin an assault on the town in early October, according to an Iraqi official.

In Anbar province, meanwhile, Iraqi forces announced the retaking Thursday of their first major objective, the town of Ana. They will later push toward the top prize in western Iraq, the border crossing town of al-Qaim.

The operations to retake Hawija and towns in Anbar launched as the Kurdish region in Iraq's north prepares to hold a controversial independence referendum on Sept. 25. The Iraqi government, United Nations and U.S., along with most of the international community, have opposed the vote's timing in large part because it coincides with the final stages of the battle against Islamic State.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170922ed9m0000v
