World
German Police Arrest Man With Bomb-Making Material; The move follows the detention of two other suspected Islamic terrorists this month

By Ruth Bender 
489 words
23 February 2017
16:14
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN—erman police detained a 26-year-old German man suspected of planning a terror attack and seized bomb-making material at his home, prosecutors and local police said on Thursday.

Authorities in the state of Lower Saxony said the man, whose name wasn't released, confessed to planning a bomb attack on soldiers or policemen. He is a follower of the fundamentalist Salafi branch of Islam that security officials say has become a breeding ground for terrorists.

The arrest comes only two weeks after police in the same region arrested two other men suspected of plotting at attack. Authorities across the country have been on heightened alert since an attack on a Berlin Christmas market in December that left 12 dead and was later claimed by the terror group Islamic State.

Germany's domestic intelligence agency Wednesday warned that the country was witnessing a rapid rise in the number of radical Islamists and had been receiving an unprecedented number of tips about impending terror attacks. The number of known Islamic extremists in the country had risen to around 1,600 from some 100 in 2013, said Hans-Georg Maassen, Germany's domestic intelligence chief. Of those, police considers some 570 to be capable of committing an attack.

"Fighting all manifestations of terrorism and Islamism has top priority," said Uwe Lürig, president of the police in Götingen, which conducted the recent arrests,

Prosecutors and police said the man detained on Wednesday confessed that he planned to lure police officials or soldiers into a trap and then kill them with a self-made explosive device.

During the raid in the small town of Northeim, police found chemicals and other materials that can be used to manufacture an unconventional explosive device, police and prosecutors said.

Police in Götingen earlier this month arrested an Algerian and a Nigerian man suspected of plotting an attack. A police spokeswoman said for now there was no indication of any connection between the two plots.

Police had found weapons, ammunition, a machete and ISIS flags in their homes and recovered electronic communications in which the two talked about an attack "similar to that in Berlin" in December.

On Dec. 19, rejected Tunisian asylum-seeker Anis Amri killed 12 people and injured scores by ramming with a truck at a busy Christmas market in the German capital. The attack spurred a flurry of government initiatives to beef up the surveillance of suspected extremists in the country and expedite the deportation of the foreigners among them.

Investigations into both suspected plots are ongoing, a police spokeswoman said. The state of Lower Saxony is currently trying to deport the Algerian and Nigerian suspects, who were born in Germany but don't have German nationality.

Write to Ruth Bender at Ruth.Bender@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170223ed2n00691
