World News: U.S. Admiral Warns On Jihadists in Asia

By Rob Taylor 
388 words
29 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRISBANE, Australia -- The onslaught by Islamic State-aligned militants in the southern Philippines should be a wake-up call to Asia that battle-hardened jihadists returning from the Middle East are seeking to open new fronts in the region, the commander of U.S. Pacific forces said.

Adm. Harry Harris, in a speech to the Australian Strategic Policy Institute on Wednesday, said Islamic State was a "nemesis to humanity" that threatened to spread as it loses ground in Syria and Iraq.

Philippine troops have been battling insurgents linked to Islamic State for a month in Marawi city on the southern island of Mindanao. The insurgents have been seeking to create a caliphate, and governments across Southeast Asia and Australia have been watching with concern as militants from Indonesia, Malaysia, Yemen and Saudi Arabia join the fight.

"Marawi is a wake-up call for every nation in the Indo-Asia Pacific," Adm. Harris said. "These terrorists are using combat tactics that we've seen in the Middle East to kill in the city of Marawi, in Mindanao, the first time ISIS-inspired forces have banded together to fight on this kind of scale."

Having traveled to Mindanao from Syria and Iraq, these militants are passing resources and Islamist ideology to homegrown radicals, Adm. Harris said, having used another name for the group. He called for closer cooperation among nations in the region, including those with large Muslim populations, to confront the threat.

"The Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia Bangladesh, New Zealand, Australia and the United States could be a natural partnership with this purpose in mind," he said. "We can counter violent extremists organizations like ISIS collaborating with regional allies and partners that may have elements in their countries sympathetic to ISIS's cause."

Adm. Harris, known for his hawkish views on Beijing's muscle-flexing in the South China Sea, urged China to end its militarization of disputed atolls, which in the past he has called a "great wall of sand." He said Beijing was using its military and economic power to erode international stability and rules.

Adm. Harris issued a fresh call for China to do more to rein in North Korea's nuclear-weapons and missile program.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170628ed6t00012
