Best of the Web
Opinion
Tipping Over Trump? As voting begins in Georgia, Democrats wonder if their candidate can be taken seriously.

By James Freeman 
1,260 words
30 May 2017
23:33
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Early voting is underway today in Georgia's Sixth Congressional District, where Democrats figure they finally enjoy favorable terrain to score a victory in a special election. It's their candidate that has them worried.

To this point, the anti-Trump "resistance" has been more successful in drawing media attention than in winning elections or raising money. Since Donald Trump's stunning victory in November, Democrats have lost a run-off election for a U.S. Senate seat in Louisiana as well as open races for U.S. House seats in Kansas and Montana. The donkeys have suffered a further shellacking when it comes to raising money. The Republican National Committee ended April with a cash-on-hand advantage of more than $30 million over its Democratic counterpart, notes the Washington Examiner.

But Democrats have been spending a lot in the Georgia contest to replace former Rep. Tom Price, who is now President Trump's health secretary. The district, which will be voting through June 20, has been reliably Republican for decades. But it's the kind of upscale suburb where voters have never fully embraced Mr. Trump, though they gave him slightly more votes than Hillary Clinton in November. Hoping to capitalize on concerns about the President but mindful of the area's voting history, Democrats are presenting 30-year-old Jon Ossoff as a social liberal and fiscal moderate. He's promising to work across the aisle on issues like tax reform. Mr. Ossoff is facing Republican Karen Handel, a former Georgia Secretary of State.

But more than Ms. Handel, it seems to be their own candidate that Democrats fear most. Specifically, they are hoping that district residents can be persuaded to vote early before thinking too much about whether Mr. Ossoff is up to the job. The Washington Postreports, "Now more than ever, some party strategists fear that if he cannot put the race away ahead of June 20, late-breaking voters will not view him as a serious enough alternative in these politically turbulent times."

Now why would strategists in his own party suspect that voters won't take him seriously? According to his statement on his campaign website, Mr. Ossoff is a very serious man indeed:

I lead a company that investigates corrupt politicians and organized crime.

Our team has taken down human traffickers, exposed dozens of corrupt officials around the world, and uncovered atrocities committed by ISIS in Iraq. Previously, I was a senior national security staffer in the U.S. Congress, working with our military and intelligence community to keep Georgians safe while investigating wrongdoing by government contractors.

Mr. Ossoff adds that "as a Congressional aide, I learned how to get things done in Washington. On Capitol Hill and as a journalist, I've learned how to expose and fight the abuse of power."

It sounds like quite a compelling resume to assemble by the age of 30, especially when one learns that Mr. Ossoff also found time to squeeze in a master's degree.

The Atlanta Journal Constitutiondiscovered that one reason Mr. Ossoff leads his company, which makes documentary films, is that he used an inheritance to buy it—r at least a part of it. "I'm involved intimately in every phase of production," he tells the paper. Yet while the production company's website duly notes his titles of CEO and managing director, as of this writing it doesn't mention his name in a description of the company's various film projects.

And then there's Mr. Ossoff's rendering of his congressional career. The friendly liberal confines of Politifact rated as "half true" his statement at a campaign event that "I've got five years of experience as a national security staffer in the U.S. Congress."

Mr. Ossoff had included in the "five years" his part-time work while a student at Georgetown. During this period he was a "legislative correspondent," which typically means a drafter of form letters to constituents. But his employer at the time, Rep. Hank Johnson, (D., Ga.) assures Politifact that even though Mr. Ossoff was a junior aide, "to say that Jon staffed me on national security, that's entirely, 100 percent correct."

It's the shorter period during which Mr. Ossoff really was a full-time aide to a Member of Congress that might be most interesting to the voters of Georgia's Sixth District. Politifact says that Mr. Ossoff became Mr. Johnson's "senior legislative assistant" in January of 2010. While veterans of Capitol Hill might question whether a college kid working part time would be trusted as a lawmaker's principal aide on national security, there seems to be no argument that by 2010 Mr. Ossoff was firmly in charge of this portfolio for Mr. Johnson.

Among the most important responsibilities of such a job is to ensure that the lawmaker is well prepared for hearings of the House Armed Services Committee, on which Mr. Johnson sat at the time. Ideally, staff will provide useful background, prepare a compelling opening statement for the lawmaker to read and also draft a list of suggested questions to elicit valuable information. At the very least, the job of staff is to prevent the lawmaker from looking like he's not on top of the relevant issues.

That bar proved to be a little too high on March 25, 2010 when Mr. Johnson, presumably staffed by Mr. Ossoff, had an exchange with Admiral Robert Willard, commander of the U.S. Pacific Command. Here's an excerpt from the transcript, in which they discuss the Pacific island of Guam:

JOHNSON: This is an island that, at its widest level is, what, 12 miles from shore to shore? And at its smallest level or smallest location, it's seven miles between one shore and the other. Is that correct?

WILLARD: I don't have the exact dimensions, but to your point, sir, I think Guam is a small island.

JOHNSON: A very small island and about 24 miles, if I recall, long. So 24 miles long, about seven miles wide at the least widest place on the island and about 12 miles wide on the widest part of the island. And I don't know how many square miles that is. Do you happen to know?

WILLARD: I don't have that figure with me, sir. I can certainly supply it to you if you'd like.

JOHNSON: Yes. My fear is that the whole island will become so overly populated that it will tip over and capsize.

WILLARD: We don't anticipate that.

With more than 673,000 views on Youtube, the video from this 2010 hearing could rank among the most popular films that Mr. Ossoff has ever produced.

It's not the only part of his record that voters in the Atlanta suburbs might want to consider. The Almanac of American Politics reports that Rep. Johnson has a "solidly liberal voting record" and is even more liberal on economic issues than on social ones. Is it reasonable to expect that his former aide will now chart a very different course?

The larger question is how much voters of Georgia's Sixth District are willing to pay to send Donald Trump a message. It seems that Democratic strategists don't want voters to spend too much time thinking about the answer.

Bottom Stories of the Day will return on Wednesday.

Document WSJO000020170530ed5u00669
