World
Tillerson Meeting Hangs Over Russia's Criticism of U.S. Strike in Syria; Moscow offers measured response to missile strike ahead of Sergei Lavrov's meeting with Secretary of State

By Thomas Grove 
646 words
9 April 2017
17:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW—ussia responded to a U.S. missile attack on a Syrian air base  with stern words over the weekend but has kept a long-awaited visit to Moscow by U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson on track.

Mr. Tillerson and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke by telephone Saturday about the changed situation in Syria  following last week's missile attack, the Russian foreign ministry said in a statement.

"The attack on a country whose government is fighting terrorism only plays into the hands of extremists and creates additional threats for regional and global security," the statement cited Mr. Lavrov as saying.

Russia has supported the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad but also has looked to repair ties with the United States. Mr. Tillerson's coming visit has been cast by Russian officials as a step in establishing good working relations with the administration of President Donald Trump .

Rhetoric aside, Russia's response to the strikes has been measured. Within hours of Russia's promise to suspend a 2015 agreement on military coordination of strikes in Syria  in retaliation for the strike, Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Moscow was open to dialogue with the United States, and Russian lawmakers said the attack wouldn't affect Mr. Tillerson's visit to Moscow Wednesday.

"[For Russia,] Syria is less important as an issue in and of itself and more important as a lever in its relationship with the West," said Andrey Kortunov, director of the Russian International Affairs Council in Moscow.

Russia has faced international isolation over its involvement in the crisis in Ukraine, but Russian President Vladimir Putin 's intervention in Syria in 2015 made his country an indispensable player in the Middle East.

Moscow denies Syrian government involvement in the chemical attack in Syria's Idlib province  that spurred U.S. strikes . Russia's defense ministry said Saturday Syria's Shayrat base, which was struck by U.S. missiles, had no chemical weapons and that the strikes resembled the run-up to the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003.

While Mr. Tillerson's trip is scheduled to proceed as planned, U.K. Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson canceled a planned trip for Russia, his office said Saturday.

Mr. Johnson had been due to fly to Moscow Monday to meet with Mr. Lavrov, but canceled that trip following consultation with Mr. Tillerson to prioritize attendance at a coming meeting of the Group of Seven advanced economies in Lucca, Italy.

Developments in Syria have changed the situation fundamentally," Mr. Johnson said, adding that the U.S. secretary of state "will visit Moscow as planned and, following the G-7 meeting, will be able to deliver that clear and co-ordinated message to the Russians."

Russia dismissed the news and mocked the British government , saying that the United Kingdom likely wanted to align its position with the U.S. The Russian embassy in London, which maintains a combative presence on Twitter , called Mr. Johnson's cancellation " theatrics for lack of argument ."

Jason Douglas in London contributed to this article.

Write to Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com 

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base 

* Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base 

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to ‘o More' in Syria 

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents 

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight 

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria 

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule 

* How the Trump Administration's Language Shifted Quickly on Assad 

* President Trump's Syria Statement 

Document WSJO000020170409ed49001p5
