U.S.; Politics
U.S.-Led Coalition Confirms Strikes Hit Mosul Site Where Civilians Died

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT 
416 words
25 March 2017
18:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —he American-led military coalition in Iraq said Saturday that an initial review of recent airstrikes in Mosul, the Islamic State’ last stronghold in Iraq, had confirmed that the strikes hit a site where scores of civilians were killed.

The inquiry, military officials said, found that a building had collapsed a few days after strikes by American forces. United States officials are seeking to determine whether the airstrikes brought down the building, leaving many Iraqis dead, or the Islamic State used the strikes as an opportunity to detonate an explosive in the building.

The Pentagon had acknowledged on Friday that it was investigating reports that its airstrikes had caused deaths in Mosul. The next phase of the investigation, military officials said, is likely to take about three weeks.

The March 17 airstrikes —hich Iraqis said had led to the deaths of possibly 200 people —ould have produced among the highest civilian death tolls in an American air mission since the United States invaded Iraq in 2003.

The reports of heavy civilian casualties have come at a critical point in the military campaign to defeat the Islamic State. Iraqi officials said that the Trump administration had appeared to loosen restrictions on the rules of engagement, making it easier for the Iraqis to call in airstrikes. The Iraqis had been frustrated by the Obama administration’ deliberate approach.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said that the rules had not been loosened.

The coalition said in a statement on Saturday that the airstrikes had been conducted “t the request of the Iraqi security forces,”nd that it believed it was hitting Islamic State fighters and equipment.

“he coalition respects human life, which is why we are assisting our Iraqi partner forces in their effort to liberate their lands from ISIS brutality,”he statement said. “ur goal has always been for zero civilian casualties, but the coalition will not abandon our commitment to our Iraqi partners because of ISIS’ inhuman tactics terrorizing civilians, using human shields, and fighting from protected sites such as schools, hospitals, religious sites and civilian neighborhoods.”

It added: “oalition forces work diligently and deliberately to be precise in our airstrikes. Coalition forces comply with the Law of Armed Conflict and take all reasonable precautions during the planning and execution of airstrikes to reduce the risk of harm to civilians.”

Helene Cooper contributed reporting.

Document NYTFEED020170325ed3p004jx
