World
The 10-Point.A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,078 words
16 June 2017
12:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,             

Russian Roulette             

The U.S. Senate overwhelmingly passed a bill Thursday to expand sanctions on Moscow and wrest more control of Russia policy from the Trump administration, bucking criticism from European allies, the State Department and the Kremlin. The bipartisan bill, which passed on a 98-2 vote, requires that the administration receive congressional approval to lift existing sanctions on Russia. It also broadens sanctions on the country's energy sector, mandates punishment of malicious cyber actors and crimps financing available to the Russian banking and energy industries. The result is the strongest rebuke yet from U.S. lawmakers to Moscow over Russia's alleged interference in the 2016 presidential campaign. The bill also represents a warning shot to the White House from the Senate, where lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have raised concerns the Trump administration isn't responding forcefully enough to Russia.              

The Antisocial Network             

Facebook is leaning more on artificial intelligence. Under intense political pressure to better block terrorist propaganda, the social-media giant said it has expanded its use of A.I. in recent months to identify potential terrorist postings—nd at times to delete or block them without review by a human. In the past, Facebook and other tech companies relied mostly on users and human moderators to identify offensive content. Even when algorithms flagged content for removal, these companies generally turned to humans to make a final call. In response to a groundswell of criticism from governments and advertisers, Facebook disclosed new software that it says it is using to better police its content. One tool combs the site for known terrorist imagery to stop it from being reposted, while another set of algorithms attempts to identify propagandists and sometimes autonomously block them from opening new accounts after they have been kicked off the platform.             

Quants Cool Off             

This year is shaping up to be a dismal one for so-called quant funds, typically some of Wall Street's hottest investors. Over all, quantitative funds, which use sophisticated statistical models—ften developed by Ph.D.s—ather than human research and intuition to find attractive trades, rose 1.44% this year through May. That compares with a gain of 8.7% for the S&P 500 index and a rise of 5.7% for the Vanguard Balanced Index Fund, which invests 60% in stocks and 40% in bonds. So far, though, the weakness hasn't stunted investor interest. Through the first quarter of the year, $4.6 billion of net new money was invested in quant funds, even as more than $10 billion was withdrawn from non-quant funds. Still, the disappointing recent performance raises questions among some investors about whether too much money is pursuing quant strategies and whether these funds are beginning to suffer as a result.             

The Bell Tolls for Whom              

Would anyone listen to a band called the Whom? And for that matter, would the signature phrases of "Ghostbusters" and a certain Bo Diddley song have worked if they had read "Whom ya gonna call?" and "Whom Do You Love?" As the controversial four-letter word is increasingly neglected and scorned in popular culture, die-hard grammarians are fighting to save it. Twitter advises users on "who to follow," so Thomas Steiner, a systems engineer at Google, wrote a free browser plug-in that automatically corrects the "who" to "whom." Some say he "fixed the internet," but others say the formality is better left to butlers. Take our quiz to see if you know who's who and who's whom.

Today's Video                 

Escape the Hamptons                                  

Shelter Island—n 8,000-acre spot of land wedged between the North and South Forks of Long Island that can be reached only by boat or private plane—raws a moneyed crowd in search of a more laid-back vibe.                                           

TOP STORIES                 

U.S.                 

Rural America Is Stranded in the Dial-Up Age

Trump to Issue Directive Narrowing Obama's Cuba Opening

WORLD                 

Russia Says \b ISIS\b0  Leader May Have Been Killed in Airstrike

Arab Diplomats Seek to Sway Trump Administration in Middle East Rift

BUSINESS                 

Nestlélans to Sell Its U.S. Confectionery Business

Nike to Cut Jobs as It Combats Sneaker Slump

MARKETS                 

U.S.'s Latest Target in 1MDB Probe: Leonardo DiCaprio's Art, Miranda Kerr's Jewelry

A Radical Thought for Investors

Number of the Day                 

19%                 

The drop in Kroger shares Thursday after the U.S.'s biggest supermarket chain said that sales at longstanding stores fell for the second straight quarter and that increasing competition would hurt earnings for the year.                                                        

Today's Question                  

Returning to our story above, with whom do you agree—he grammar sticklers or their detractors? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.                          

                 —ompiled by Margaret Rawson                                           

Reader Response                 

Responding to yesterday's question on the shooting in Virginia,                     Bill Weber of California said: "Incidents such as these are no doubt partly encouraged by the partisan rancor and social media vitriol infecting our political dialogue. It will be interesting to see how long it will be before the 'coming together' comments from our political leaders—rom both parties—eturn to the irresponsible and unproductive noise that seems to so enthrall our politicians and the media." Mohd Saat of Virginia wrote: "It's a shrewd reminder that there could always be a sliver of extremism in any group—olitical, racial or religious. The war against terror needs to account for different perspectives and motives." And Tom Palumbo of Michigan reflected: "We throw a lot of hate at politicians (in all parties), but they are still human, and they and their families receive death threats more often than we may realize."                                           

                     This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.                                  

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.                                           

The 10-Point In Your Inbox                 

Document WSJO000020170616ed6g00209
