
World
Syrian Forces Seize Mayadeen From  ISIS , State Media Says; Local activist groups say Syrian military remains on the edge of the city

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nour Alakraa 
813 words
14 October 2017
18:07
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT—yrian government forces on Saturday recaptured the strategic city of Mayadeen from Islamic State, the country's state media reported, even as local activists cautioned that the Damascus regime hadn't clinched control of the entire area.

If the reports from Syria's government are verified, the recapture of Mayadeen would serve a significant blow to the militant group, whose space to operate is rapidly shrinking amid a multipronged assault.

In separate and opposing military offensives led by the U.S. and Damascus over the past three years, Islamic State has been dislodged from dozens of towns and cities in the caliphate it once ruled across Iraq and Syria. With the capture of Mayadeen, an oil-wealthy city in eastern Deir Ezzor province, the group's reign is rapidly approaching an ignominious end.

Syrian "armed forces in cooperation with its allies regained control over Mayadeen city in Deir Ezzor," Syrian state news agency SANA reported Saturday, quoting a "military source." Many Islamic State fighters were killed in the battle, according to SANA.

The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that Mayadeen was captured after Islamic State had transferred 1,000 fighters to reinforce the city last week. Regime forces and allied militias are now combing through the city, it said.

Local activist groups, however, disputed the reports.

Damascus's military remains on the edges of the city and is carrying out heavy air and mortar strikes on Mayadeen, said Sarmad al-Jilani, an activist with Sound and Picture, a group documenting human-rights violations in eastern Syria.

"The regime is trying to advance but ISIS is repelling these attacks," he said, using a common acronym for the militant group. "The clashes are intense."

The U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State said it was aware of reports that Damascus and its allies had taken Mayadeen but couldn't verify them.

In various battles over the past month, the militant group has typically surrendered rather than fight to the death as expected, according to the coalition's spokesman, U.S. Army Col. Ryan Dillon.

Col. Dillon said he wouldn't be surprised if the rapid assault on Mayadeen and its quick fall to Damascus forces—f proven to be true—as the result of Islamic State fleeing the city to go underground and launch a traditional insurgency. U.S.-backed Iraqi forces expected a grueling fight to dislodge Islamic State from Hawija in Iraq in August and found little resistance. They were able to quickly retake the city in October.

"They've been demoralized and have seen the writing on the wall and they're quitting," he said in a phone interview. "The promise of the caliphate is not very promising anymore."

The Pentagon had hoped to recapture Mayadeen itself and mine the city for intelligence it could use to undermine Islamic State's global network and capture or kill its leadership. But as Damascus and its allies launched a lightning offensive on the city, the U.S.'s local allies, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, were blocked from moving on Mayadeen.

As Islamic State was uprooted across Syria and Iraq, the group moved its top leadership and military hardware to Mayadeen over the past year. The city also sits nearby Syria's most lucrative oil reserves, making Mayadeen a huge revenue source for the group.

The city has also been a priority for Damascus's military operations. The government is​n dire need of oil reserves to kick-start its sputtering economy and fill up its coffers, tapped out after nearly seven years of war.

Separately on Saturday, local antigovernment activists said U.S.-backed Kurdish forces were nearing a deal to retake the city of Raqqa by negotiating the surrender of hundreds of Islamic State fighters holed up in roughly a square kilometer in the city center. Raqqa once served as the de facto caliphate, or religious empire, of Islamic State's rule in Syria.

A Saturday statement by the U.S.-led coalition, however, said a convoy of vehicles filled with civilians was preparing to depart Raqqa later in the day. Although it didn't say whether local Syrian Islamic State fighters were part of the evacuation deal, it did exclude foreign fighters from the agreement. It didn't say how many people were due to leave Raqqa.

The coalition said the negotiated deal was designed to minimize civilian casualties.

Four months ago, the Iraqi city of Mosul—he second-largest city in Iraq and once the largest under Islamic State's control—as retaken.

Nazih Osseiran and Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171014edae00105
