The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
Listen to ‘he Daily’ Big Losses for  ISIS 

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
486 words
19 October 2017
12:19
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

Its de facto capital is falling. Its territory has shriveled to a handful of outposts. Its surviving leaders are on the run, and its fighters are surrendering.

Is the Islamic State losing its war, or starting a new one?

On today’ episode:

•Rod Nordland, The New York Times’ bureau chief in Kabul, Afghanistan, discusses the militant group’ recent losses in Iraq.

•Rukmini Callimachi, who covers terrorism and the Islamic State for The Times, talks about what’ next for the militant group.

Background reading:

•ore than 1,000 militants fleeing the former Islamic State stronghold of Hawija, Iraq, turned themselves in to the Kurdish authorities. Many claim to have been only cooks or clerks.

•fter losing territory, the Islamic State may return to its guerrilla roots.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’e interested in advertising with “he Daily,”rite to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

From your mobile device:

You can listen and subscribe to “he Daily”rom any podcast player. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Christopher Werth, senior producer; Annie Brown, producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director.

Rod Nordland and Rukmini Callimachi contributed reporting.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Men who fled the last few Islamic State-controlled areas in Hawija, Iraq, waiting to be questioned in Kirkuk. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171019edaj0035x
