World
German Officials Met Seven Times to Discuss Berlin Attacker Before Assault; But authorities concluded that Anis Amri didn't pose an acute risk and that they didn't have enough evidence to hold up in court, officials testify

By Ruth Bender 
1,278 words
5 January 2017
22:17
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DÜSELDORF, Germany—op federal and regional security officials met seven times to discuss the potential danger posed by Tunisian migrant Anis Amri in the year before he attacked a Berlin Christmas market, the latest revelation in a string of mishaps that failed to prevent the attack.             

The new details, disclosed by security officials at a regional parliamentary hearing Thursday, suggest that German security and intelligence authorities miscalculated the immediate threat that Amri presented. Despite extensive surveillance, efforts to detain him repeatedly faltered because police and prosecutors believed they didn't have evidence that would stand up in court, the officials said.                           

The emerging affair is raising questions about the ability of Germany, which was struck four times by Islamist terrorists last year, to prevent future attacks. It is also increasing pressure on Chancellor Angela Merkel amid accusations that her decision to accept hundreds of thousands of mostly Muslim migrants in 2015 might have put the country at risk.                           

"Does one have to sit in a truck before the state can act?" Social Democrat Andreas Bialas asked at one point in the nearly five-hour hearing in the parliament of North Rhine-Westphalia, echoing the public's stupefaction at the series of revelations about why the state failed to stop Amri despite all it knew about him.              

A recent Insa poll conducted for the German daily Bild found just under a fifth of those surveyed trusted Ms. Merkel's Christian Democrats to protect the country from further attacks; Other German parties scored even lower. Germany's interior minister, meanwhile, proposed this week revamping Germany's decentralized security apparatus to close the gaps exposed by the Berlin attack.              

"Nobody understands how a known extremist was able to walk around freely in this country," Gregor Golland, a regional lawmaker from the Christian Democratic Union, said before questioning security officials Thursday.             

The illegal Tunisian immigrant—is asylum request was rejected in June 2016—ammed a truck into Christmas market in central Berlin on Dec. 19, leaving 12 people dead and dozens more injured. He escaped after German police first arrested the wrong man and then missed crucial evidence identifying Amri in a first sweep of the truck. Amri trekked across Europe and was eventually shot by Italian police four days later.             

                 Ralf Jäer, interior minister for North Rhine-Westphalia—here Amri spent his first months in Germany and first prompted authorities' alarm—aid officials had done everything they could legally do to pre-empt an attack.             

"I think security authorities went to the maximum limit of our state of law. They did everything they could and were allowed to do," he said.             

The new details showed that Amri tricked German authorities from the moment he entered the country in the summer of 2015, taking advantage of the administrative chaos amid a surge of asylum seekers that year and the lack of central database about the new arrivals to register himself across different states, using 14 different identities, sometimes leaving just a day between registrations.             

Authorities were first alerted to his radical Islamist tendencies in October that year. A roommate of Amri warned authorities that he had spotted photos on Amri's cellphone showing people dressed in black and carrying weapons. An undercover agent infiltrated in the radical Islamist scene also reported Amri appeared to be serving as a messenger for a local Islamist network, officials said.             

In December 2015, having started to monitor him, authorities became aware that Amri had been expressing the desire to stage an attack in Germany and had searched online for instructions about how to build bombs. They were also tipped off that he was planning a robbery in Berlin to fund the purchase of weapons.             

Shortly thereafter, state and federal security officials gathered for the first time to discuss his case. In February, Amri was placed on a list of dangerous radical Islamists. That month alone, officials from the joint counterterrorism center in Berlin, an umbrella body for 40 federal and regional security agencies, discussed Amri's case at three separate meetings.              

Four more meetings follow in April, in June and a last one in November, a month before the attack. It isn't clear whether all the meetings were held to talk exclusively Amri or whether his was one of several cases discussed.             

Still, in what turned out to be a misjudgment, authorities concluded Amri didn't pose an acute risk, officials testified Thursday.             

Undercover agents learned in February that Amri had moved to Berlin and was, again, speaking about wanting to die in the name of Allah and seeking other people to help him plan and conduct an attack.             

On the back of this latest information, federal prosecutors opened an fresh undercover investigation, monitoring his communications for six months through September. But after this failed to yield actionable evidence, investigators suspended their electronic surveillance.              

As recently as July, authorities discussed targeting Amri with a new legal provision that fast-tracks the deportation of someone seen as a particular terror risk. In a discussion involving a representative from the general prosecutor's office, they decided against using the measure because they didn't believe they could prove in court that Amri presented an acute danger, state Interior Ministry official Burkhard Schnieder said.             

In any case, officials said, a deportation effort using that legal provision in the summer wouldn't have worked because Tunisian officials only confirmed Amri's status as a Tunisian citizen in October.             

In September and October last year, police in North Rhine-Westphalia received tips from Tunisian and Moroccan security agencies that Amri supported Islamic State, had contact with Islamic State sympathizers in Berlin, and "wanted to carry out a project" in Germany, Dieter Schümann, head of North Rhine-Westphalia's criminal investigative agency LKA told lawmakers.             

But the warnings were too abstract to justify an arrest, he added. On a scale of one to eight, with one representing the strongest risk, Amri ranked five, Mr. Schümann said.              

German security officials use the scale, which is based on an analysis of evidence against a suspect, to assess the threat posed by a suspect. But because authorities never had proof that he was putting in motion any intent or plan to attack, Amri didn't register a higher score.             

In other words, what appeared like a mountain of evidence documenting Amri's intention, officials said, didn't satisfy German courts' requirements to detain him on suspicion of planning an attack or even being a passive member of a foreign terrorist organization— criminal offense under German law.              

"What authorities knew was hearsay. That isn't enough to arrest someone. You need to convince a judge," Mr. Jäer said. He said many of the 548 potentially dangerous radical Islamists on German authorities' official list of potential attackers have been known "to make such threats or even just brag about wanting to do an attack" without acting on them.             

Anton Troianovski in Berlin      contributed to this article.             

                 Write to Ruth Bender at Ruth.Bender@wsj.com