opinion
How  ISIS  Grew in the Philippines; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
509 words
15 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

While President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines was bragging about his brutal war on drugs, the Islamic State was consolidating its sway over Islamist rebel groups on the island of Mindanao. The extent to which ISIS has succeeded is now alarmingly evident, as a pitched battle between Philippine troops and Islamist militants for control of the largely Muslim city of Marawi enters its fourth week.

With the presence of foreign fighters, including Malaysians and Indonesians, who are working alongside militant leaders with strong ties to ISIS, Mr. Duterte has a serious problem on his hands that threatens the security of the entire region.

The news on Wednesday that, in addition to American military advisers and intelligence assistance, United States troops are now on the ground in Marawi raises the stakes. Mr. Duterte, who has threatened to eject American forces from his country, said Sunday that he was unaware of the presence of military assistance in Marawi. In fact, the Pentagon has no permanent presence in the Philippines, but for years has kept 50 to 100 Special Forces troops in the south of the country on rotational exercises. Despite Mr. Duterte’ hostility to America, his army has close ties to the Pentagon, values its help against the extremists and has resisted Mr. Duterte’ efforts to expel the Americans.

Mr. Duterte’ braggadocio is partly to blame for the escalation of the conflict. Last year, he rejected a cease-fire offer from the Maute group, which is leading the fight in Marawi. He said in December that when the group pledged to “o down upon Marawi to burn the place,”e responded, “o ahead, do it.”he battle raging now began when Maute militants, who have joined forces with the Abu Sayyaf Islamist group, strongly resisted an attempt on May 23 by Philippine security forces to capture Isnilon Hapilon, Abu Sayyaf’ leader. Mr. Hapilon is on the F.B.I.’ list of most-wanted terrorists.

The Philippine military is pummeling Marawi with daily bombing runs, presumably with targeting assistance from Americans. More than 200 people have been killed and some 2,000 civilians are believed to be trapped.

President Trump has supported Mr. Duterte, including his use of extrajudicial killings to fight the drug trade, and he has intensified the fight against ISIS in Syria and Iraq. But strongman tactics —ike Mr. Duterte’ recent threat to declare martial law over the entire country —nd a widening military show of brute force aided by the United States will not address the fundamental problems that have fueled militant movements on Mindanao since the 1970s: grinding poverty; lawless zones, where criminal gangs reign; and overcrowded prisons, which are a boon to Islamist recruiters.

The most urgent need now is to ratchet down the fight in Marawi and press Mr. Duterte to restart negotiations with militant groups.

* Duterte, Focused on Drug Users in Philippines, Ignored Rise of \b ISIS\b0 

* In Indonesia and Philippines, Militants Find a Common Bond: \b ISIS\b0 

Document INHT000020170615ed6f0000e
