Bookshelf
After the Death Of bin Laden

By Mark Moyar 
1,002 words
25 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Anatomy of Terror

By Ali Soufan

(Norton, 359 pages, $27.95)

Terror in France

By Gilles Kepel with Antoine Jardin

(Princeton, 220 pages, $29.95)

Six years ago, U.S. helicopters infiltrated Pakistani air space to deposit Navy SEALs at Osama bin Laden's compound. Storming it in the dark of night, the SEALs shot dead all the adult male inhabitants and secured the site within 20 minutes. During the next 20 minutes, they loaded bin Laden's corpse, computers and flash drives onto helicopters, then departed into the moonless sky.

What happened next is the subject of Ali Soufan's "Anatomy of Terror." A Lebanese-born Muslim, Mr. Soufan tracked al Qaeda during his career as an FBI special agent and went on to publish a book on the period from 9/11 to 2011 titled "The Black Banners." "Anatomy of Terror" picks up the story since 2011, though much of it, for context, rehearses the events of the preceding decade.

Bin Laden's demise, Mr. Soufan says, deprived al Qaeda of a charismatic leader at its apex. His successor, the Egyptian doctor Ayman al Zawahiri, had the personal magnetism of a falafel. By 2011, however, bin Laden had set the conditions for al Qaeda to survive without his inspirational guidance, by seeding his lieutenants across Africa, the Middle East and Asia and shifting from spectacular terrorism to governance in fragile states.

The most successful al Qaeda offshoot, ISIS, attracted an estimated 38,000 foreign nationals to its cause. Its explosive growth, however, provoked interventions by Iran, Russia and the United States. Although ISIS has since lost much of its caliphate, it has begun to adjust in a manner similar to al Qaeda, by going underground in sympathetic areas and establishing franchises in other Islamic countries.

Mr. Soufan asserts that the United States has relied too much on military power to contend with al Qaeda and ISIS, neglecting the diplomatic, political and economic tools required for developing local institutions and countering extremist ideas. In fact, the United States has spent huge sums on reconstruction, nation building and information operations in Iraq and Afghanistan. Regrettably, much of it was squandered by corruption or by Barack Obama's hasty withdrawal from the two countries.

According to Mr. Soufan, recent events have disproved Samuel Huntington's prediction of a clash among civilizations. The struggles of al Qaeda and ISIS, he says, are struggles within Islamic civilization. "All of the major combatants are Muslim," he writes. "For all their military might, outside powers like the United States and the Russian Federation can at best only marginally affect the outcome."

Yet only in an ahistorical sense has the United States not been a "major combatant." Less than a decade has passed since 160,000 U.S. troops were at war in Iraq, and fewer than six years since 100,000 were fighting in Afghanistan. Russia's intervention in Syria saved Bashar al Assad's government from a defeat that could have turned the broader conflict upside-down. Today both the United States and Russia remain capable of more than marginal influence.

If one looks outside the Middle East, one can find plenty of violent conflicts between Islamic and Christian civilizations. At the moment, the most violent are taking place in Africa. Less violent, but more momentous, are the clashes between Muslims and Westerners in Europe. Those clashes are the subject of Gilles Kepel's "Terror in France."

Mr. Kepel published the first edition of his book in French in late 2015, just weeks after ISIS operatives killed 130 civilians in Paris. During the next year, Islamic terrorists conducted further deadly attacks in France and struck in Belgium, Denmark and Germany. Mr. Kepel gives the impression that ISIS has generated little sympathy among French Muslims; one would have liked more from him on that subject, given how much controversy surrounds the extent of support for ISIS among Europe's Muslims.

Mr. Kepel traces the radicalization of some French Muslims to the riots of 2005, during which Muslim youths erupted in protest against alleged police misconduct. Initially, France's Socialists tried to win Muslim voters by pushing for more government spending in blighted neighborhoods. They were overshadowed by Nicolas Sarkozy, whose vow to restore law and order won him middle-class votes and the 2007 election. As president, he promoted French national identity and called on immigrants to assimilate -- e.g., by forgoing the veiling of women. Muslims were pivotal in Mr. Sarkozy's narrow defeat in 2012, as more than 80% of Muslim voters cast their ballots for Francois Hollande, the Socialist candidate, who espoused multiculturalism. Mr. Hollande, in his turn, alienated large segments of the Muslim population by pushing for same-sex marriage.

Mr. Kepel blasts political elites, saying that they are an insular class reliant on "pseudo-experts who block public financing for in-depth research that would expose their imposture." But he reserves his greatest scorn for the populist nationalists. Their overreaction to Islamic terrorism, he says, will drive French Muslims into the arms of the extremists. Unfortunately, he offers little in the way of alternative policies. He calls for greater attention to academic research on Islam but does not spell out the academic insights that remain unknown to government leaders.

Given the absence of clear alternatives, one must conclude from "Terror in France" that the French should keep muddling along, avoiding any bold changes lest they antagonize Muslims. The election of Emmanuel Macron seems to set France on that track. But if the Muslim population in France continues to grow faster than the non-Muslim one, its political clout will grow as well. With greater power, Muslims will be even more inclined than now to clash with a Western civilization whose vitality seems to erode with every passing day.

---

Mr. Moyar is the author of "Oppose Any Foe: The Rise of America's Special Operations Forces."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170725ed7p0000m
