World
U.S., Afghan Forces Begin Cleanup After Massive Bomb Blast; U.S. national security adviser McMaster in Kabul for ‘mportant talks,' Afghan defense minister says

By Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil 
736 words
15 April 2017
21:12
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL—.S. national security adviser Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster arrived in Kabul on Saturday, Afghanistan's defense minister said, days after the U.S. military dropped the second-largest nonnuclear weapon in its arsenal on a cave complex used by Islamic State fighters in east Afghanistan.

The minister, Gen. Abdullah Habibi, tweeted news of the visit and said Gen. McMaster was in the Afghan capital for "important talks with Afghan authorities."

The U.S. military didn't immediately comment on whether Gen. McMaster was in the country or what such a visit would entail.

The visit came as Afghan officials said the death toll caused by the nearly 22,000-pound U.S. bomb strike against Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan had risen to 92 militants, with U.S. and Afghan commando units discovering bodies in caves during an operation to clear the site.

The U.S. military declined to comment on the figures, without providing a reason. Coalition officials questioned how their Afghan counterparts had reached those numbers.

Gen. McMaster, a military strategist with extensive battle experience, served in both Afghanistan and Iraq. He has been a harsh critic of U.S. action taken at the behest of local nonmilitary officials without what he has described as properly developed strategies, clear goals and detailed exit plans.

The visit would mark his first trip to Afghanistan as national security adviser.

U.S. President Donald Trump's team is assessing a request by Army Gen. John Nicholson, the top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan, to put thousands more troops on the ground to bolster the fight against the Taliban.

The country's largest insurgent group has made sweeping gains since most foreign troops withdrew in 2014, and is currently threatening to overrun at least half a dozen provincial capitals from the government.

Coalition officials are also concerned about the emerging Islamic State presence in Afghanistan, fearing its vast ungoverned areas could become a haven for the group's fighters fleeing conflict in Iraq and Syria.

The extremist group began operating in Afghanistan in the vacuum left by foreign troops and has since established a base in the east and pockets of support across the country.

The U.S. military on Thursday dropped the Massive Ordnance Air Blast into the mountains of Achin district, an Islamic State stronghold, weeks into a large-scale joint U.S. and Afghan operation targeting Islamic State.

Known as the "mother of all bombs," it struck a complex of tunnels and caves used by the militant group to train fighters and launch operations.

An Afghan security official said the commandos continued to clear bodies from the caves.

"Twenty-two bodies were found in one cave, 60 in another and 10 bodies in a third, he said, adding that the figure would likely increase in the mountainous area of Achin district, an Islamic State stronghold near the Pakistani border.

The bomb sent a huge mushroom cloud into the sky, shaking homes miles away. The complex was originally a mine that had been excavated by local villagers before being seized by Islamic State.

On Friday, the top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan said no civilians had been harmed in the strike and it was the right weapon to use for the job of clearing the complex.

U.S. and Afghan Special Forces had initially tried to clear the area using a combination of ground operations and airstrikes, but had run into difficulty because it was mountainous and heavily mined.

The recent death of a U.S. soldier there helped motivate the decision to deploy the weapon, a coalition official said, as military leaders were concerned about losing more soldiers in the effort to clear Islamic State complex.

"The MOAB is definitely a munition designed for a specific tactical purpose," said Adam Routh, a defense researcher who served in Afghanistan in an Army Ranger Regiment.

Ben Kesling in Washington contributed to this article

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com

More Coverage

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  in Afghanistan

* Bomb Built Partly as Psychological Deterrent

* The ‘other of All Bombs': Fast Facts

* Why U.S. Dropped ‘other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0 

Document WSJO000020170415ed4f000rt
