World News: Islamic State Leader In Afghanistan Killed

By Jessica Donati 
404 words
8 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A12
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL -- The U.S. military on Sunday said its forces killed Sheikh Abdul Hasib, Islamic State's leader in Afghanistan, in a joint raid with Afghan soldiers in the eastern Nangarhar province.

A combined force of U.S. Army Rangers and Afghan Special Forces -- who were dropped into the Mohmand Valley near the border with Pakistan by helicopter -- carried out the operation on the night of April 26 in which a number of the extremist group's top commanders also were killed, according to a U.S. military statement.

The U.S. military has since said it is investigating whether the two U.S. soldiers who died in the operation were killed by friendly fire.

"This successful joint operation is another important step in our relentless campaign," said General John Nicholson, the top commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan. "This is the second ISIS-K emir we have killed in nine months, along with dozens of their leaders and hundreds of their fighters."

The operation took place in the same area where the U.S. military dropped one of the largest nonnuclear bombs in its arsenal, nicknamed the "Mother of All Bombs," on an Islamic State tunnel-and-cave complex.

In the weeks leading up to the blast, U.S. and Afghan forces killed more than a dozen Islamic State fighters, driving the militants out of villages that had been occupied for years into the mountains, according to Afghan special forces.

Residents there were returning home for the first time in years to inspect the damage. Locals interviewed by The Wall Street Journal during the visit to the area were supportive of the strike and hoped for compensation after years of hardship.

The Islamic State Khorasan, as the Afghan affiliate is known, emerged in Afghanistan in late 2014, as most coalition troops were withdrawing from the country. The group established a foothold in the east and has been working to win pockets of support in other parts of the country.

The U.S. military said Islamic State's Afghan leader was responsible for a recent attack on a military hospital in Kabul that killed more than 100 people.

Islamic State's presence in the area has shrunk in the weeks since U.S. and Afghan forces have pressed an offensive into its eastern stronghold.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170508ed580001m
