Movies
Review: Climate Change and Conflicts in ‘he Age of Consequences’

By GLENN KENNY 
369 words
26 January 2017
22:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Last year, Jared P. Scott tackled financial inequality in “equiem for the American Dream,” a film about Noam Chomsky, of which he was a director. In “he Age of Consequences,” Mr. Scott looks at climate change from the perspective of military experts rather than that of scientists.

Michael Breen, a former Army officer, considers the role of climate change in human conflicts. “hink about relationships we don’ often look at,”e says. “he civil war in Syria, now going on for years, hundreds of thousands dead —he entire region is in chaos as a result.”he movie details how a three-year drought helped precipitate that war.

Talking about one of the strategies of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS, the retired Brig. Gen. Stephen Cheney states, “ou control the water, you control the livelihood of the people.”limate change affects the amount of water, and so terrorist organizations move to where the water is. The connection between environmental disaster and terrorism is drawn, persuasively. (The “ad Max: Fury Road”cenario in which a despot clings to power by holding on to a water supply starts to look mildly plausible.)

The information here is compelling and frightening, but the movie is ham-handed. Malcolm Francis’ almost nonstop score is emphatic to a fault; interviewees extrapolate a “erfect storm”f concurrent catastrophes that could cripple the United States; there’ no bright side, and scant hope, just 70 minutes of unrelenting bad news served with dollops of implicit audience-blaming. A tacked-on eight-minute “all to action”oda feels halfhearted.

At one point, a historian observes that “dvanced societies were very vulnerable to confusing lifestyle with life itself.”his may be true, but delivered in this tricksy, overdetermined way, it’ likely to elicit a pot-calling-the-kettle-black response from overwhelmed viewers.

Not rated. Running time: 1 hour 20 minutes.

The Age of Consequences investigates climate change impacts on increased resource scarcity, migration, and conflict through the lens of national security and global stability. Through unflinching case-study analysis, distinguished U.S. military admi | By ENCOMPASS FILMS and FLASHPOINT FILMS 

Document NYTFEED020170126ed1q008hl
