world
Iraqi Forces Enter Western Mosul, in Fierce Battle Against  ISIS 

By OMAR AL-JAWOSHY and SEWELL CHAN 
934 words
7 March 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD —raqi forces trying to reclaim Mosul penetrated the western part of the city on Tuesday, retaking a bridge and several public buildings during heavy clashes with the Islamic State militants, officials said.

Civilians reported that the bombardment and gunfire were the heaviest since Feb. 19, the beginning of the operation to retake the western part of the city —he country’ second-largest, where roughly a million people are trapped and living in desperate conditions.

Soldiers recaptured a branch of the central bank, an archaeological museum that jihadists ransacked after taking the city in 2014, and the Hurriya Bridge, which crosses the Tigris River in the center of the city, Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool, a military spokesman, said by phone.

“e will never stop until we liberate Mosul entirely,”e said.

Lt. Gen. Raed Shakir Jawdat, the chief of the federal police, said that security forces had also retaken a government compound. A statement from the American-led coalition forces assisting the Iraqis gave a similar account of their progress.

The museum was a focus of worldwide attention after it was seized by Islamic State militants, who used sledgehammers and drills to smash artifacts in its collection. The destruction horrified scholars around the world.

Lt. Gen. Abdul Amir al-Muhammadawi, a spokesman for an elite unit of Interior Ministry troops, said that the buildings retaken from the Islamic State included a courthouse where militants had carried out whippings, stonings and beheadings, as well as a building where militants had thrown people to their deaths.

“he liberation of the government compound is a step forward for our forces, a vital motivating position for us,”eneral Muhammadawi said in an interview. “he international coalition’ airstrikes and drones have played a major role in accelerating the liberation of the city.”

It was not yet clear how lasting the gains would be. Although soldiers raised the Iraqi flag over the government compound, in the Dawasa neighborhood, they were later forced to retreat under heavy fire from Islamic State militants, The Associated Press reported.

لحظة رفع #العلم_العراقي فوق مبنى محافظة نينوى من قبل أبطال إتحادية تلعفر #غرد_للحشد_وجيش_واتحاديه#الموصل_مدينه_منكوبه#حشد_الحسين_للنازحينpic.twitter.com/hXfnbGCBe1 —الوعد الصادق (@Imparatoriraq) March 7, 2017

The museum remained within the range of Islamic State snipers, making it vulnerable to a counterattack.

Social media accounts associated with the Islamic State reported that militants had set off three suicide bombs during the offensive.

Though the military advances were tenuous, government forces said that Tuesday represented a critical moment in their weekslong offensive to retake western Mosul.

The fighting, which included recapturing most of the city’ airport, has not been easy. It took Iraqi forces more than three months to gain control over eastern Mosul, and casualties there were heavy.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and the chief of staff of the country’ armed forces toured the headquarters of the operations command responsible for the offensive, just outside Mosul, on Tuesday to “eview the progress of security forces,”ccording to a statement.

The Hurriya, or Freedom, Bridge is the second of five bridges to be retaken by government forces. American-led airstrikes damaged all five bridges last year in a bid to isolate the militants in Mosul.

Mosul fell to the Islamic State in June 2014, along with large parts of the country’ north and west. It is the largest Iraqi population center still wholly or partly in the militant group’ control.

The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported on Tuesday that about 46,000 people had been displaced from their homes in Mosul since Feb. 19 —ncluding 13,350 on Friday alone —n the highest continuous displacement of civilians since October.

“ll people displaced from western Mosul have been accommodated either with family members or in camps or emergency sites, where they receive a tented plot, basic household supplies, hygiene kits and 30-day food rations,”he United Nations office said. Camp construction and the installation of water and sanitation services are underway south of Mosul, the office added.

Since Feb. 19, the office said, more than 500 people have been treated for conflict-related wounds, including 15 people who were hospitalized in Erbil, a Kurdish-held city east of Mosul, for treatment after an apparent chemical-weapon attack.

Many in eastern Mosul lack drinking water, officials have warned, and many in the southern and western parts of the city are drinking untreated water, which could lead to the spread of diseases.

Follow Sewell Chan on Twitter @sewellchan.Omar al-Jawoshy reported from Baghdad, and Sewell Chan from London. Maher Samaan contributed reporting from Paris.

PHOTOS: Iraqi police officers cleared a road to the government compound in western Mosul on Tuesday. Iraqis reported progress in their mission to recapture the city. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KHALID MOHAMMED/ASSOCIATED PRESS); On a day of gains, a sniper, right, aimed Tuesday at Islamic State fighters in western Mosul. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARIS MESSINIS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE —ETTY IMAGES)

* U.S. Forces Play Crucial Role Against \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul

* Most of Mosul Airport Is Taken by Iraqi Forces in Push Against \b ISIS\b0 

* Iraq Starts Offensive to Retake Western Mosul From \b ISIS\b0 

* Iraqi Civilians Pay Heavy Price as Attack on \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul Nears

* A Times Photographer’ Inside Look at the War on \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul

* Iraqi Forces Take Eastern Mosul From Islamic State

* Hungry, Thirsty and Bloodied in Battle to Retake Mosul From \b ISIS\b0 

Document INHT000020170308ed370000n
