World News: World Watch

408 words
20 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

AFGHANISTAN

Soldier Killed After

Firing on U.S. Troops

An Afghan soldier opened fire Sunday inside a base in the southern Helmand province, wounding three U.S. troops before being shot dead.

Navy Capt.. Bill Salvin, a U.S. military spokesman, said coalition forces had killed the soldier "to end the attack," but Col. Mohammad Rasoul Zazai, an Afghan army spokesman, said the soldier had made a "mistake" and hadn't fired deliberately.

---

UNITED ARAB EMIRATES

Canadian Awarded

Global Teacher Prize

A Canadian school teacher whose teaching philosophy underscores hope and acts of kindness in an isolated corner of Quebec won a $1 million prize Sunday in what has become one of the most-coveted awards for teaching excellence.

Maggie MacDonnell -- who teaches in the Arctic village of Salluit -- was awarded the annual Global Teacher Prize at a ceremony in Dubai, in the U.A.E., beating thousands of other applicants from around the world.

The prize was established three years ago to recognize one exceptional teacher a year who has made an outstanding contribution to the profession, employs innovative classroom practices and encourages others to join the teaching profession.

-- Associated Press

---

SYRIA

U.S. Confirms Strike

Targeting al Qaeda

The U.S. military confirmed on Friday that it had conducted an airstrike in Syria the day before that targeted al Qaeda militants, but said there was no indication of civilian casualties despite reports from witnesses and on social media that noncombatants had died.

The strike in Al Jinah, about 27 kilometers southwest of Aleppo, targeted a gathering of al Qaeda operatives, some of whom likely were considered high-value targets, said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman. He said U.S. officials were unaware of any "credible" reports of civilian casualties.

However, rescue workers, opposition monitoring groups and residents said the airstrike hit a mosque in an opposition-held area, killing at least 46 civilians.

-- Ben Kesling

---

IRAQ

Army Moves Toward

Strategic Mosque

Iraqi army helicopters strafed and rocketed Islamic State positions in Mosul's Old City on Sunday as ground troops fought street battles to close in on the al-Nuri Mosque, where ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi declared a caliphate in 2014 after the militants seized swathes of Iraq and Syria. Iraqi government forces have cleared the east and half of western Mosul and are now focused on the Old City.

-- Reuters

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170320ed3k00026
