Foreign Desk; SECT
How the Iran Terror Attacks Unfolded at Two Sites

By RUSSELL GOLDMAN 
301 words
8 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Suicide bombers and gunmen wielding assault rifles attacked Iran's Parliament building and the mausoleum of the country's founder on Wednesday in a bloody siege that left at least a dozen people dead.

The attack on Parliament

On Wednesday morning, gunmen carrying Kalashnikov rifles entered Tehran's imposing Parliament building, which was under renovation for security improvements.

As lawmakers were meeting in the building's main chamber, one attacker detonated an explosive device and blew himself up elsewhere in the building, Iranian state television reported.

ISIS claims responsibility

The Islamic State, the radical Sunni group, said in a short video posted by its Amaq News Agency that it was behind the attack against Shiite-majority Iran. It was the first time the group took responsibility for an attack in Iran.

The Islamic State said a video was filmed inside Parliament during the attack.

The video shows a bloody body on the floor next to a desk. An Iranian member of Parliament said the images in the video were from inside his office, and he said the victims were his ''colleagues.''

A voice on the video is heard in Arabic saying: ''Do you think we will leave? We will remain, God willing.''

A second attack hits mausoleum

Soon after the attack on the Parliament began, two assailants entered the west wing of a sprawling compound about 10 miles south. The compound houses the tomb of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the spiritual leader of the 1979 revolution.

According to Iranian news agencies, one attacker detonated explosives, killing one person. Another was reported to have killed himself by swallowing a cyanide pill, although another account said the militant had been shot to death by security forces outside the mausoleum.

Document NYTF000020170608ed680005b
