World News: Iraq, Militias Duel Over Next Big Battle --- Baghdad says it will steer  ISIS  offensive, but Iran-backed Shiite fighters want that role

By Tamer El-Ghobashy and Ali A. Nabhan 
861 words
4 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- A political dispute threatens to complicate Iraq's next big battle against Islamic State as the extremists face imminent defeat in Mosul: Both the U.S.-backed Iraqi military and Shiite militias supported by Iran want to spearhead the fight.

The militias have surrounded Tal Afar, which has strategic and symbolic value to Islamic State, in a bid to choke off the terror group's supply lines between Iraq and neighboring Syria. The militias are eager to avenge the loss of Tal Afar to Islamic State in 2014, which was followed by mass executions of Shiites.

But the Iraqi government says the military will be in charge of the Tal Afar campaign. The military is currently fighting Islamic State in Mosul, a much larger city about 75 miles to the east. The extremist fighters are cornered in Mosul's Old City and expected to lose there within weeks.

"We are seeing the end of the fake Daesh state," Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said late last week, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Both the Iraqi military and the Shiite militias report to Mr. Abadi. The militias were legally incorporated into Iraq's security apparatus by parliament last year, though their top leaders have close ties to Tehran.

Tal Afar had a population of about 200,000 before Islamic State took over, but the town has outsize importance because of its proximity to Syria and Turkey. The U.S. and Turkey worry that Tehran wants its militia allies to take Tal Afar to help secure a land corridor by which Iran could move fighters and resources through Iraq into Syria, a longtime Iranian ally, and on to Lebanon, where Iran's Hezbollah proxy is based.

Maj. Gen. Joseph Martin, the commander of U.S. ground forces in Iraq, said that he expects the Iraqi military to lead the fight for Tal Afar and added that U.S. advisers "will be right there with them." The U.S. won't work with the Shiite militias, he said.

Turkey has threatened to send in its own troops if the Shiite militias lead the fight for Tal Afar, once part of the Ottoman Empire.

The jockeying for battlefield influence is taking place amid rising tension between the U.S. and Iran-backed forces seeking to buttress the Damascus regime. In recent weeks, U.S. forces have shot down a Syrian regime warplane and two Iranian-made drones viewed as threats to the U.S. and allied fighters in the campaign against Islamic State in Syria, and carried out airstrikes on Syrian government forces and their Iranian-backed allies in southern Syria.

Iraqi officials estimate between 1,000 and 1,500 Islamic State fighters remain in Tal Afar. The extremists have used the town as a way station between Mosul and Raqqa, the group's de facto capital in Syria. A handful of the group's leaders are natives of Tal Afar, and thousands of its foreign fighters came to the town for training.

The Shiite militias have had Tal Afar surrounded for at least six months, and the siege has weakened the remaining militants there. It has taken a heavy toll on civilians.

No regular Iraqi military units have yet been assigned the task of entering the town. Iraqi officials say forces will enter the town soon after Mosul is declared liberated. The U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State has been coordinating airstrikes in Tal Afar for about eight months with the Iraqi military, which is stationed outside the town.

The presence of the Shiite militias around Tal Afar is due to a political concession Mr. Abadi made to keep them out of the fight for Mosul, a majority Sunni city, where their participation would have risked deepening sectarian strife.

On one hand, the militias are credited with helping protect Baghdad during Islamic State's sweep through Iraq in 2014 that saw one-third of the country fall to the extremists, and later with helping win back important cities like Tikrit and Fallujah. But the militias have also been dogged by accusations of killing Sunnis they suspect of sympathizing with Islamic State, a Sunni-led group.

The militias have said that the abuses are isolated and that the militias have become more disciplined. The militias say their sacrifices in the fight to surround Tal Afar give them the right to lead the battle for the town itself.

The U.S. is opposed to that possibility. A senior U.S. official pointed to the issue of who would hold ground in Tal Afar recaptured from Islamic State. "We don't want those vacuums filled by Shiite militias," the official said.

Sunni tribal fighters from Tal Afar, armed and trained since last year by U.S. military advisers, say they have already been marginalized and, in some cases, abused by the Shiite militias.

---

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170703ed740001e
