World
London Attacker Khuram Butt Proselytized, Neighbors Say; Slain knife-wielder was in TV documentary on jihadism last year, sought to influence children

By Riva Gold, Mike Bird, Georgi Kantchev and Margot Patrick 
1,019 words
5 June 2017
22:31
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON—olice identified one of the terrorists who struck London over the weekend as Khuram Butt, a 27-year-old Pakistani-born British citizen who neighbors said appeared in a television documentary about Islamic extremism in the U.K.

The father of two young children was one of three knife-wielding attackers killed in a hail of police bullets after mowing down pedestrians and stabbing people Saturday night. Eight people were killed and dozens more injured. Eighteen of the wounded were still in critical condition on Monday.

Authorities said Butt was "known to" police and the security services, but they said they had no intelligence suggesting he was planning an attack.

Another assailant was identified as Rachid Redouane, 30, who police said had claimed to be Moroccan and Libyan. Police said they were trying to determine the identity of the third attacker.

Neighbors of Butt in Barking, a district of East London, said he spent time proselytizing in a way that made them feel uneasy, sometimes seeking out children in a local park.

"He said very Islamic things. He said he was a soldier," said one neighbor, who asked that his name not be used. "My partner reported him for his extremism. They never came back to us. Nothing ever happened."

Another person who lived nearby, Regina Khan, said, "He mostly hung around with the teenage boys round here."

"We didn't find it comfortable, we found it scary," she added. "I used to tell my daughter there's something wrong with this guy, his aggression."

Butt and several other men were stopped by two policemen outside London's Regent's Park in July 2015, according to a documentary tracking a group of Muslim activists that aired on British television last year. Police asked the men if they had "an ISIS-looking" flag before searching them and let them go after an hour, according to the documentary's narrator.

Before being stopped, Butt and six other men were filmed praying before a black flag bearing Arabic writing. After the prayers, the men are seen sitting or sprawled on the grass in the summer sun, listening to preacher Mohammed Shamsuddin tell them not to be deterred.

"This is a passing time for us so this is a type of jihad for you, that you came out to do da'wah, enjoining good and forbidding evil," Mr. Shamsuddin said, using an Arabic term that refers to religious outreach. Butt appears in close-up, nodding at the words.

The 46-minute documentary by Jamie Roberts tracks a group of extremist preachers in London calling for the imposition of Islamic law in Britain. Before the prayers in the park, Mr. Shamsuddin appears using a loudspeaker outside a London mosque, flanked by police and telling worshipers and passersby that Shariah law is coming to the U.K.

Another man shown alongside Butt in the park, Abu Haleema, discusses in the film how police reviewed messages he exchanged with a 14-year old who was later convicted of plotting to kill police officers and sentenced to life in prison in 2015. Another man featured in the documentary, Siddhartha Dhar, was dubbed "Jihadi Sid" after a man believed to be him appeared in Islamic State videos making threats against the U.K.

Messrs. Haleema and Shamsuddin were reviled in the British press when the documentary aired. In one scene, the two men are shown laughing and snacking as they watch an Islamic State execution video played for them by the filmmaker. A spokeswoman for Channel 4, which aired the documentary in January 2016, declined to comment.

Mr. Roberts didn't immediately respond to requests for comment. Mr. Dhar has been widely reported to have left for Syria. The whereabouts of Messrs. Haleema and Shamsuddin couldn't immediately be determined.

Last year, Butt knocked on the door of neighbor Michael Demitir, 33, bringing bread and rice and telling him, "My god says I must be nice to everyone." Mr. Demitir said Butt once asked if he and his family watched TV. When Mr. Demitir said yes, he said Butt replied: "TV is the devil. I don't watch TV. I only watch Allah."

About two months ago, Mr. Demitir said, Butt came knocking again, this time asking to take his 10-year-old son for a ride in his car. "I said, 'Oi, are you crazy, why do you want my kid, man? Stay away,'" Mr. Demitir said. "He raised his hands, smiled and walked away."

Ramana Huczko, another neighbor, said she had been to the park with Butt and her children. "He would be playing with the kids and would sometimes get down to pray," she said, adding that he was "very religious."

"He loved kids," she added. But Ms. Huczko said she refused a request from Butt to take her children, aged between 10 and 16, to McDonald's. "I said no, I'm not happy with this."

Samiya Mohammed, 18, who lives near Butt's apartment complex, said recently she had seen a change in his behavior.

"Maybe towards the end, people started feeling a bit weird about him. With the kids it was kind of too much. He was really close with one of the kids," she said, saying the boy was around nine years old.

Said Mohammed, who helps run a nearby mosque, said Butt's religious practices were a mystery.

"I always asked everybody where he prayed and no one knew," the 52-year-old repairman said. He said he had seen Butt pray in a couple of local mosques, but not regularly.

"He wasn't much of a Muslim," he said.

Max Colchester, Laurence Fletcher, Jon Sindreu, Jenny Gross and Benoit Faucon

Write to Riva Gold at riva.gold@wsj.com, Mike Bird at Mike.Bird@wsj.com, Georgi Kantchev at georgi.kantchev@wsj.com and Margot Patrick at margot.patrick@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170605ed65005xx
