Nicholas Kristof
How to Use Twitter

By LIRIEL HIGA 
2,121 words
22 November 2017
21:44
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

Nicholas Kristof: My tutor on Twitter has been Liriel Higa ( @iDiplomacy ), who works on social media for The New York Times Opinion section. I asked her to write this quick “ow to Tweet”uide for the public. Liriel, a former nationally ranked gymnast, was a congressional reporter early in her career, then oversaw social media for the Half the Sky movement, and finally joined the Times in 2014 and has been with us since. Here’ her guide to how to make Twitter work for you.

It’ easy to hate on Twitter . It recently ditched its trim 140-character identity to become (to the naysayers) a bloated 280 characters. It verified (then unverified) a white supremacist , but it suspended Rose McGowan’ Twitter account , leaving the initial impression it had to do with her speaking out about Harvey Weinstein. It enabled racist, misogynistic trolls  o attack Leslie Jones.

But for all its flaws, Twitter is where so much public debate happens, much of it fascinating. t’ where you can actually reach beyond your bubble. It’ where you can leapfrog publicists and ides and interact with your idols. ere are my suggestions for ow you should use it —nd why it’ orthwhile.

Start by listening. here’ a misconception that the main use of Twitter is for self-promotion. Unless you’e @Beyonce , who has tweeted 10 times and has 15.2 million followers, chances are, you won’ have tons of followers when you’e starting out. Thoughtful tweeting certainly improves the platform as a whole, but you don’ need any followers to mine Twitter for useful information.

Don’ just follow people you personally know. ollow people who are experts in your fields of interest. Maybe you like comedy, in which case Aparna Nancherla ( @aparnapkin ) or Stephen Colbert ( @StephenColbert ) are must follows. f you’e a fan of cooking, try the chef Yotam Ottolenghi ( @ottolenghi ) for gorgeous food photos or Ruth Reichl ( @ruthreichl ), the former editor of Gourmet, for her scene-setting morning poems. To learn more about the universe, follow Neil deGrasse Tyson ( @neiltyson ). If you want insights on Sweden, @sweden  urns over the account to a new Swede each week. Regardless of your political persuasion, Republican Sen. Ben Sasse of Nebraska ( @bensasse ) has a terrific Twitter feed, especially for a politician —uthentic and humorous, while Democratic Sen. Cory Booker ( @CoryBooker ) is great bout replying to people. For those following the investigation of Russian meddling into the election, reet Bharara ( @PreetBharara ), Sally Yates ( @SallyQYates ) and Benjamin Wittes ( @benjaminwittes ) are ones to watch. Check out who they’e following and retweeting for more ideas of where to go from there.

Turn to Twitter for breaking news. ore so than any other social platform, Twitter excels at breaking news. (That means misinformation spreads fast too, but it’ typically quick to self-correct.) It’ helpful to follow news organizations —hen there’ big news, they’l all be tweeting about it. But individual journalists also regularly hare scoops on the platform. I learned about Osama bin Laden’ death because I followed @brianstelter , who tweeted  t 10:25 p.m. on May 1, 2011: Chief of staff for former defense sec. Rumsfeld, @keithurbahn , tweets: “’ told by a reputable person they have killed Osama Bin Laden.”resident Obama didn’ give his scheduled 10:30 p.m. speech till an hour later, by which point the networks had already interrupted programming 45 minutes prior after confirming the news with anonymous sources.

Join  worldwide support network. t has been less than wo months ince the Harvey Weinstein story broke , and famous, lecherous men continue to be toppled daily from their pedestals. But for the many people that aren’ famous, and weren’ harassed by anyone famous, there will probably not be a newspaper story written about their abuser. Yet the #metoo hashtag empowered women to share their stories on their own terms, and helped keep the momentum going. A more recent #MeAt14  ashtag in response to allegations about Roy Moore pushes back at the idea that a 14-year-old can consent to sex or sexual contact at that age.

Share your expertise when you tweet. Keep it conversational hether it’ professional or personal. One of my favorite recently discovered Twitter accounts is uba Baladzhaeva ( @cherity1313 ), a “ymnerd from Israel,”ho speaks Russian and will often tweet translated English summaries of books by Russian gymnasts such as Alexei Nemov , 2000 Olympic all-around champion, and Svetlana Khorkina , three-time all-around world champion. Share the articles or videos you’e enjoying, and explain what compelled you to share it (instead of just tweeting the headline). If you see someone asking a question that you know the answer to, respond. Or maybe you have a question or request of one of your idols. Dreams can come true . If you feel like you’e not sure what to say, join the conversation on live events such as the Oscars or State of the Union. Don’ worry too much about whether what you have to say is boring or people won’ care about it.

Share things that make you laugh, even —r especially —f it’ at your own expense. “hy do all of bruni’ recent column titles read like a terrible adult video library” @jack_hamilton tweeted , with a screenshot of Frank Bruni’ recent columns with headlines such as “oo Many Wonderful Women to Count,”“Jared Kushner , the Prince of Having It Both Ways,”nd “Donald Trump’ Dominatrix.”ather than ignore the critique, @FrankBruni engaged : “amn, you got me. I’e been pulling the phrases from the spines of discs lined up beneath my television set. The fun has just begun!”

That doesn’ mean anything goes. f you’e about to tweet something off color, or something that people who don’ know you could misconstrue, delete! One tweet made Justine Sacco the poster child for tweets gone wrong , when as a joke, she wrote before hopping on a plane: “oing to Africa. Hope I don’ get AIDS. Just kidding. I’ white!”uring her flight to Johannesburg, #HasJustineLandedYet become a top trend, and she ended up losing her PR job.

Just because you have 280 characters doesn’ mean you need to use them all. Sign up at twitter.com , or download the app. When choosing your username (it begins with an “”, make sure it wouldn’ urn off a future employer. ou can write text, upload GIFS, four photos or a video up to 2 minutes and 20 seconds. If you find yourself in the middle of a protest, try filming live video , and check in to your location so you will be easier to find. If you have the time and inclination, you can use a link shortener like bitly  r goo.gl  o your link doesn’ trail away into ellipses, or use a website’ share tool to tweet, which typically pulls up the headline and a shortened link.

When someone says something better than you could, retweet them. There’ no need for you to say the same thing, but less elegantly. But unless you know the person who did the original tweet, it’ a good idea to check out their bio and feed first so you don’ end up retweeting a conspiracy theorist. You can also retweet with a comment. That’ a opular activity ith @realDonaldTrump .

Give credit where it’ due. f you’e sharing a fascinating article, chances are the author is on Twitter , in which case use their handle in your tweet. This will alert them that you have mentioned them (when they check their notifications), and is the courteous thing to do. Or if you’e sharing something that you learned from someone else, it’ nice to give them a hat tip, or h/t, or say “ia @zoegberg ,”or example.

Tap into the wisdom of the crowd. David Farenthold ( @Farenthold ), who won a Pulitzer Prize for his coverage of President Trump, regularly crowdsources his reporting. He used Twitter  o help him find one of the portraits of Trump, paid for by the Trump Foundation, hanging in the Trump National Doral Miami gold course. You don’ need to be a reporter like Farenthold to ask the crowd —r an individual person —or advice (but do avoid asking anything you can easily learn by googling).

Don’ worry that friend who has annoying tweets hat just followed you. nlike Facebook , where you accept or decline a friend request, you can simply choose not to follow back. If you feel compelled to follow back out of social obligation but would rather not see their tweets, you can mute them . They won’ know you’e muted them, and you can unmute them at any time.

If your brilliance can’ be confined to 280 characters, try a threaded tweet. ukmini Callimachi ( @rcallimachi ), who covers ISIS, does great threaded tweets with timely analysis on events such as the recent Manhattan terrorist attack  nd the Vegas mass shooting . To make it a thread, reply to your previous tweet (instead of just composing a new tweet), so if someone clicks on one tweet, all the tweets will appear. And it’ good to number your tweets to signify that it’ part of a thread.

Don’ overuse hashtags. It looks spammy if you stick them in every tweet. But they can be great for live events and chats. For example, every Wednesday at 7 p.m. E.T., people with pugs and dog-loving lurkers join #pugchat  o answer questions such as : Does your pug have any hidden talents? #PugChat. Or, if you’e tired of scrolling, try the #longreads  ashtag for meaty reading recommendations.

You can survive the trolls. irst: Sorry, that stinks. econd, if ou get trolled, there’ a few ways to deal with them. One option is to simply not check your notifications, which is what Michelle Goldberg does ( @michelleinbklyn ). If you’e feeling conflict-averse, block them . They won’ be able to follow you, and won’ see your tweets, and vice versa. If you really want to be protected, you can make your account private, in which case you need to grant permission for people to follow you. You can also confront them and retweet with a comment to your followers. If someone is being racist or misogynist, they’e fair game for being called on it.

Use a profile photo. ake it easier for people to find you by using a photo, especially if your name isn’ unique. It also makes people who don’ know you less likely to mistake you for a troll or a bot. If someone is impersonating you or someone you know, report them . You can further personalize your profile by adding a header photo  nd pinning a tweet  hat represents you for people coming to your profile for the first time who are deciding whether they want to follow you.

Create or subscribe to lists about topics you care about. ay you’e conservative but want to keep tabs on what liberals are saying, without their tweets sullying your feed. You can create a “emocrats and liberals”ist that follows accounts like Nancy Pelosi ( @NancyPelosi ), Bernie Sanders ( @SenSanders ), Rachel Maddow ( @maddow ) and Talking Points Memo ( @TPM ). If you despise Donald Trump and want to know what he and the Trump clan are saying but don’ want to give him the satisfaction of having another follower, add realDonaldTrump o a list along with Melania Trump ( @Flotus ), Ivanka Trump ( @IvankaTrump ), Eric Trump ( @EricTrump ) and Donald Trump Jr . ( @DonaldJTrumpJr ).

The blue check mark isn’ everything. The blue check mark indicates an account is authentic, and is typically reserved for people with ublic profiles. “ verified badge does not imply an endorsement by Twitter .”t’ genuinely useful for accounts of people likely to be parodied, and a status symbol for some, but don’ let it crush your self esteem if you’e not verified, since the vast majority of people are not. You can follow @verified  o see the accounts that are verified.

If you’e wrong, acknowledge it. on’ perpetuate actual fake news. f you mess up, delete your tweet, write a new one  acknowledging you deleted a tweet with an error, and state the correct information.

 

Document NYTB000020171122edbm00001
