World News:  ISIS  Convoy Reaches Militant-Held Syria --- The U.S.-led coalition had ceased airstrikes on the jihadists at Russia's request

By Raja Abdulrahim and Ben Kesling 
661 words
15 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT -- Islamic State militants stranded in the Syrian desert for two weeks have reached their destination in eastern Syria, opposition activists said, after the U.S.-led coalition heeded Russia's request to cease airstrikes on the convoy's route.

The convoy of buses traveled across Syria as part of a controversial deal brokered in August by the Lebanese militia group Hezbollah that allowed 600 people -- Islamic State fighters and their families -- to withdraw from the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria and head toward its border with Iraq.

The convoy was able to reach Deir Ezzour province, an Islamic State-held area in eastern Syria, after the coalition ended its aerial surveillance and airstrikes on the group, according to the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, which has a network of activists across the country.

Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition in Iraq and Syria, said Thursday morning he couldn't confirm that the buses reached their final destination and said that the coalition hadn't had persistent surveillance of them for days.

The U.S. had been preventing the Islamic State convoy from moving toward the Iraqi border by bombing roadways and using aircraft to attack fighters who attempted to move forward. But it set aside those efforts and withdrew U.S. aircraft from the area last week at the request of Russian officials who cited a "deconfliction" agreement between Moscow and Washington, Pentagon officials said in a statement at the time.

The Russian officials said their planes were involved in operations against Islamic State in Deir Ezzour, Pentagon officials said in a statement. At the same time, fighters described as pro-Syrian regime forces advanced past the Islamic State convoy. Pentagon officials said they would continue to take steps to prevent Islamic State fighters from moving toward Iraq, but haven't specified how they intend to stop them.

"From the start of this situation on Aug. 29, we have placed responsibility for the buses and passengers on the Syrian regime, who in conjunction with Lebanese Hezbollah, brokered a deal with ISIS to move its terrorists into Iraq," Brig. Gen. Jon Braga, director of operations for the U.S. coalition, said in a statement.

Previously, the coalition had criticized the deal, launching airstrikes that cratered a road and destroyed a bridge, preventing the convoy from continuing its journey.

The coalition then targeted Islamic State fighters trying to reach the convoy to assist it, striking 85 militants and more than 40 vehicles -- describing it as an unexpected boon in the fight against the group.

"It presented an opportunity for the coalition to strike and remove several ISIS fighters and resources from the battlefield," said coalition spokesman Col. Dillon.

Deir Ezzour is one of Islamic State's last strongholds, but faces separate offensives by Syrian regime forces and the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces.

The deal to allow the convoy safe passage was reached after the Lebanese army and Syrian regime forces backed by Hezbollah launched simultaneous offensives to clear Islamic State from a mountainous Lebanese area bordering Syria.

In return, Islamic State provided information on the remains of eight Lebanese soldiers who had been kidnapped in 2014 and handed over the bodies of two Hezbollah fighters and an Iranian military adviser.

One Hezbollah prisoner who remained with the convoy as insurance for its safe passage was released once it reached Islamic State-controlled territory, according to the Observatory.

The deal was criticized by both the U.S.-led coalition and Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who called it "an insult to the Iraqi people."

"We are fighting terrorism in Iraq and we are killing them in Iraq. We don't send them to Syria," he said.