
World News: World Watch

310 words
15 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

IRAQ

ISIS Raid in South

Leaves Dozens Dead

Islamic State gunmen stormed a restaurant in southern Iraq after detonating a car bomb outside, killing more than 50 people, Iraqi officials said.

The attack, along a highway near the southern city of Nassiriya, was one of the deadliest in the country in recent months. The Sunni Muslim extremist group claimed the assault via its official Amaq news agency.

A bomb exploded in the parking area, an interior ministry official said. Men disguised as members of the mainly Shiite Muslim paramilitary forces got out of a second vehicle and entered the building, opening fire on diners, the official said. Another vehicle then blew up.

-- Ghassan Adnan

---

MALAYSIA

Blaze Kills at Least 23

At Boarding School

A predawn fire tore through an Islamic boarding school in the Malaysian capital, killing at least 23 people, mostly students trapped in their bedrooms, officials said.

Initial investigations showed the small, all-boys school was operating without a fire-safety permit, though it had applied for one, fire authorities said. The school started operating three years ago.

Students were between 13 and 17 years old.

A fire official said investigators were looking at a short-circuit or a burning mosquito coil as possible causes.

-- Yantoultra Ngui

---

UNITED KINGDOM

Officials Open Inquiry

Into London Fire

The U.K. opened an inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire that killed at least 80 people, with its chairman pledging to find answers to how a tragedy of its scale could happen in London.

Martin Moore-Bick, a retired judge appointed by the government to head the inquiry, said he recognized the anger and betrayal felt by survivors, many of whom lost everything in the June fire in the 24-story low-income apartment block in West London.

-- Jenny Gross

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170915ed9f0001n
