Best of Late Night
Arts; Television
Stephen Colbert Was ‘ike an Alien’efore He Was Famous, Louis C.K. Says

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
863 words
5 April 2017
11:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

A Portrait of the Host as a Quirky Kid

Louis C. K. scolded Jimmy Fallon last week for a pretty “umb thing”e said on “he Tonight Show.”Mr. Fallon seemed to be saying, over and over, that napping wasn’ a form of sleeping.) This week Louis C. K. aimed his playful scorn at Stephen Colbert. He said the “ate Show”ost was just a weird, nerdy kid when the two worked together on “he Dana Carvey Show”ears ago.

LOUIS C. K.: Now you’e Stephen Colbert. You’e king of the late night now. You’e a big shot. That’ right, you’e No. 1. You’e the top of the charts. But at the time, you were just this very weird-looking dude, and you had this —ou were like, ‘i!’ike you were ——

COLBERT: I was socialized, is what you mean.

LOUIS C. K.: No, you were like an alien who studied human behavior, and got close but didn’ quite get there.

COLBERT: You’e describing a sociopath. Like I could murder you and my heart rate wouldn’ go up.

LOUIS C. K.: No, no, I think you’e the next version of human.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Louis C. K. told the audience what it was like casting both Steve Carell and Mr. Colbert on the “arvey”how.

LOUIS C. K.: We talked about ‘he Steves.’hat’ what we talked about. And you were a funny pair; you were a weird, funny pair. He looked like every man, and you looked like no people.

COLBERT: I’ trying hard to make this feel like a compliment!

LOUIS C. K.: No, it really is! It is.

COLBERT: I look like no one?

LOUIS C. K.: You’e a remarkable person. You’e just unusual.

COLBERT: Well, we have a clip here ——

LOUIS C. K.: A freak. Yeah, go ahead. That was mean on purpose.

Is Kushner a Little Overworked?

Trevor Noah pointed out that President Trump has been relying more and more on his son-in-law, Jared Kushner. He’ tasked him with overseeing Middle East policy, responding to the country’ opioid epidemic and reforming the criminal justice system, as well as coordinating the visit this week by Xi Jinping, the Chinese president.

“hat is so much stuff that there’ no way Kushner isn’ going to get it all mixed up. I predict he’ just going to start messing the things up. He’l be like, ‘r. President, uh, I sent the black people to Iraq, and I’e imprisoned all of our veterans, and I injected the Chinese president with opium and, oh, ISIS is coming to Mar-a-Lago. It’ all mixed up!’”—REVOR NOAH

Some analysts are saying Mr. Trump favors Mr. Kushner because of his loyalty more than his skill set.

“h, look at that. It looks like Donald Trump has a blind trust after all.”—REVOR NOAH

The Punchiest Punchlines

“his week, the National Archives reached out to the White House and requested that all of the president’ tweets be saved and preserved for history. Future generations, I’ so, so sorry. These tweets will be saved for ‘istorical value.’nd they’l be filed under ‘mpeachment evidence.’”—AMES CORDEN

“arlier today, Donald Trump addressed a group of builders’nions, and to prove he was a builder, he spent a lot of the speech building up his ego.”—TEPHEN COLBERT

The Bits Worth Watching

“henomenal”

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Almost as phenomenal:

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

What We’e Excited About on Wednesday Night

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Colbert follows his Louis C. K. interview with another comic: Steve Martin makes a special guest appearance on “he Late Show”n Wednesday.

Also, Check This Out

In the age of Black Lives Matter, James Baldwin seems to have finally taken his place in the top tier of America’ pantheon of seminal writers and thinkers. (The film “ Am Not Your Negro,”n theaters now, is only the most recent example of his relevance.) Now a debate about how to honor his legacy has erupted in southern France. A group of Baldwin lovers is trying to turn the house where he lived for almost two decades into a writers’etreat, but some members of his family question whether the people spearheading the effort can represent Baldwin’ legacy. Even the lead organizer, who is white, has called herself “n imperfect candidate for this job.”

Louis C.K. kept up his habit of keeping it entirely real with late-show hosts. | CBS | Trevor Noah wondered if a very busy Jared Kushner might end up getting his wires crossed. | Comedy Central | James Baldwin at his home in southern France in 1979. | Ralph Gatti/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170405ed450038p
