Opinion
Terror Returns to Russia; Vladimir Putin propped up Bashar Assad instead of fighting Islamic State.

342 words
5 April 2017
01:15
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An explosive device tore through a St. Petersburg subway train Monday, killing 14 people and wounding 49. On Tuesday intelligence agencies in Russia and Kyrgyzstan identified the suspect as Akbarzhon Jalilov, a Kyrgyzs-born Russian citizen.

If true—nd Kremlin claims can't be taken at face value—his would be the second attack by a Central Asian suspect in recent months, after the gun rampage at an Istanbul nightclub over New Year's. Turkish authorities blamed Abdulkadir Masharipov, an Uzbek national, for that massacre. Islamic State claimed responsibility.

No group had taken credit for the St. Petersburg subway bombing as we went to press. But thousands of Central Asian Muslims have traveled to the Middle East to fight with jihadist groups since the Syrian civil war broke out in 2011. Islamic State has become the most popular because it's easy to join and its brutality and prowess made it the strong Islamist horse.

In the coming days the Kremlin is likely to use the attack to whip up nationalist sentiment and burnish its credentials as a stalwart asset in the global war against Islamist terror. So it's worth noting that in Syria, the most important battlefield of that war, the Russian government has gone out of its way to avoid hitting Islamic State as it seeks to prop up the regime of Bashar Assad.

As the Atlantic Council concluded in an exhaustive study last year, the Russian air campaign in Syria that began in fall 2015 and lasted until the following spring "caused only peripheral damage to ISIS" and had a "limited effect" on al Qaeda. The U.S. concluded in 2015 that more than 90% of Russian sorties targeted non-Islamic State, non-al Qaeda positions.

The deaths in St. Petersburg are a tragedy and outrage, no matter who the culprit turns out to be. The cynicism with which the Putin regime has used the threat of terrorism to its own advantage is no less ugly.

Document WSJO000020170404ed4400ayk
