World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker .

By Gerard Baker 
1,082 words
8 March 2017
12:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Yesterday I sat down with Rwanda's President Paul Kagame at the WSJ Investing in Africa conference  in London. The guerrilla fighter turned president—n power for more than two decades—aid the political tumult in the U.S. and Europe should spur African nations to carve out a path independent of Western trade, aid or influence. I invite you to watch the interview here .

Spy vs. Hacker

WikiLeaks released a massive trove of documents  and files yesterday that it says exposes how the CIA hacks smartphones, computer operating systems, message applications and internet-connected televisions, in what would be one of the biggest breaches in the spy agency's history. The group said the release, which it dubbed Vault 7, consists of 8,761 documents and files from the CIA's Center for Cyber Intelligence. The revelations fuel a continuing debate over whether intelligence agencies that discover security flaws in popular technology  should disclose them, so that the users can defend themselves from hackers , or keep that information secret for use in intelligence operations. If the leak is deemed authentic, it will also raise questions over the extent to which U.S. national security may have been compromised, given the exposure of the CIA's toolbox for conducting cyberespionage .

Second Opinions

An array of conservative lawmakers and activist groups yesterday critiqued a proposal by House GOP leaders to overturn the 2010 health law , posing the first major test of the Trump administration's ability to broker deals among Republicans in Congress. Members of two conservative House caucuses, at least three right-leaning GOP senators and a set of allied groups outside Congress signaled their dissatisfaction with the health plan. Mr. Trump endorsed the legislation but left open the question of whether he would lobby personally and forcefully for it. He met with House lawmakers responsible for gathering votes for the bill and urged them to move swiftly. But he signaled that the task, at least for now, falls to congressional leaders. Some conservatives said the legislation looks too much like the law it was meant to replace. We outline how the proposal would affect consumers .

Rainy-Day Reserves

Central banks around the world are increasing foreign-currency reserves , highlighting the fragile underpinnings of the global economic recovery despite a bullish mood in financial markets. Two-thirds of the 30 biggest emerging markets increased reserves last year, and foreign-currency holdings in Israel, Vietnam and the Czech Republic recently reached records. China's foreign reserves rose by $6.9 billion in February compared with the previous month, while some central banks in Europe have also been padding their coffers. Rising reserve balances can be a reassuring sign for investors because they show that individual nations have some capacity to deal with market shocks or economic downturns. But many analysts worry that underlying the reserve buildup are global trade and capital imbalances that could make the world vulnerable to a fresh crisis should the flow of capital be disrupted.

Write It Out

If you're having trouble getting your child to share thoughts with you, you might try a diary. Parents and children are using journals to communicate and deepen their relationships , especially during awkward adolescence. Sharing a private communication can help during some of the toughest years. Parents decide with their children what their approach will be: who is allowed to see the book; how and where the journal will be passed back and forth. They also agree on how often to write, perhaps weekly or monthly. When a parent and child are writing back and forth, it can balance out a relationship where the parent is usually the one with the upper hand. The method worked so well for one mother-daughter duo that they co-wrote a DIY version for others.

Today's Video

Casual Carpool

Thousands of San Francisco commuters use a hitchhiking system to get to work each morning. Here are the rules of the ride .

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Former \b ISIS\b0  Recruit Now a Weapon Against Terrorism 

Justice Nominee Won't Commit to a Russia Special Prosecutor 

WORLD

South Korea Receives First Components of Thaad Missile-Defense System 

Swift Banking System Bars North Korean Banks 

BUSINESS

Uber Must Temper Style Without Changing Formula for Success 

Who's to Blame for the Trucker Shortage? 

MARKETS

A Taxing Problem for Investors 

Futures Trader Goes on Sugar Binge 

Number of the Day

$892 million

The amount that Chinese telecommunications giant ZTE has agreed to pay in fines , in addition to pleading guilty to violating U.S. sanctions on Iran and obstructing justice. The settlement ends a five-year probe that has raised trade tensions between the U.S. and China.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on the WikiLeaks release? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com . Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the House GOP plan to replace Obamacare , Bill Kaupert of Illinois said: "The GOP health plan seems an excellent first step. It reduces government involvement in individual health care and increases individual choice on a gradual basis. Pending a similar resolution of the remaining details, it's a great start." But Steve Shannon of New Jersey weighed in: "The House GOP plan to replace Obamacare has as many if not more shortcomings than the Affordable Care Act. It's nothing more than political theater aimed at pleasing the GOP base rather than an honest attempt at solving what's a really serious issue for our country." And Martin M. Bress of California commented: "Millions of people will lose insurance coverage because of unaffordable costs."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux,"  a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE  to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170308ed380028l
