Lens
Multimedia
Putting a Face to a Comment: The New Online Crusaders

By REMY TUMIN 
806 words
8 November 2017
10:00
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

Nick Haynes didn’ seem so bad.

Sure, online he had promised civil war if Hillary Clinton were elected, but Mr. Haynes was first and foremost a family man. He’ given up his days of motorcycles and drinking to live a sober life in a sleepy Pennsylvania town with his four children, where he had a full-time job as a truck driver.

But his family life contrasted sharply with his other full-time job, that of a prolific online commenter. During the 2016 presidential campaign, he tweeted an average of 57 times a day about a corrupt system, biased media and “illary.”e compared voting for Mrs. Clinton to killing your own children.

It was this disconnect between “ormal life”nd intense online debate that drove Kyrre Lien, a photographer based in Oslo, to look into the lives of the online commenting community. For a project called “The Internet Warriors,”r. Lien combed through tens of thousands of online comments to put together a group of 27 internet debaters from around the world, representing all sides of the political spectrum.

“hey had steady jobs, they had family, they had friends and lived quite a normal life, but at the same time, you saw they had these hateful comments,”e said. “hat was part of what drove me to dig into this.”

In the case of Mr. Haynes, Mr. Lien assumed that he would personify his comments.

“ thought if you’e writing hateful comment towards Hillary or Trump that are really, really angry and horrible, I thought that person is going to be horrible in person as well,”r. Lien said. “ut many of the people were actually quite nice, made me coffee and tea and, until politics came up, it was like flipping the switch on a different personality.”

Still, Mr. Lien is hesitant to categorize them as internet trolls.

“abeling them all as internet trolls would be too harsh. Many of them are trolls, but many of them are just really strongly opinionated people,”r. Lien said. “ll of the people I met are really dedicated in the cause they’e fighting.”

They have full-time jobs and families, they are men and women of all ages, who feel marginalized in some way or another. Take, for example, Ashleigh Jones, 22, a psychology student in Cardiff, Wales. She’ amassed more than 180,000 tweets on various subjects including entertainment, L.G.B.T. issues and “ot guys.”

“ome people have also called me a troll, like when I said that ISIS should kill David Cameron,”Ms. Jones told Mr. Lien, referring to the former British prime minister. “ don’ think I’ a troll. I might have strong opinions, but they are just that —pinions. For me, a troll is someone who is ruining the discussion, and that’ not me.”

The photographs feature portraits of the commenters, many of them in their natural commenting habitat inside their homes. Video interviews accompany the subjects online, as well as a book.

“ust to see their homes, their decorations around them, their computers —ll of those things give quite a lot of personality to the photo,”r. Lien said.

Mr. Lien spent weeks researching and studying commenters. One thread took him down a dark path on Kim Kardashian’ Facebook account. He spent three or four days going through all the comments on her account looking for frequent commenters with a consistent message. But in the end, that was one type of opinion he wasn’ able to capture on camera —isogynists.

Mr. Lien found that the motivation behind commenters depends on their political affiliation. On the right, it’ “ecause they feel threatened and society is letting them down, they’e being left by themselves,”r. Lien said, whereas people on the left “eel that we need to stand up for what we believe in.”

Sofia Srour, 23 and Muslim, defends her religion daily.

“here is so much ignorance and hate directed towards my religion in the comment section that I quickly become irritated. Anger drives me,”he told Mr. Lien. “ have spent more than three hours every day sharing my views on Islam. It’ a bit scary to engage in these discussions, but I feel that it’ important to balance out all the negativity that is posted.”

Mr. Lien may have spent four years trailing the lives of what he calls internet warriors, but the photographer is far from calling himself a troll.

“’ like to be more of an internet peacekeeping force than an internet warrior,”e said.

Follow @Kyrre and @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Kyrre Lien is also on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020171108edb800001
