World News: U.S., Syria Allies at Odds on Raqqa

By Ben Kesling 
605 words
15 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

WASHINGTON -- America's main military ally in Syria agreed to let Islamic State fighters escape from a key battle this week without conferring with its U.S. partners, who targeted the extremists as they tried to flee, Pentagon officials said Friday.

The unusual deal and U.S. response exposed a disconnect in the anti-Islamic State coalition on the eve of a pivotal offensive to retake Raqqa, the extremist group's biggest Syrian stronghold. It called into question whether the U.S. military will honor battlefield commitments made by its partners, and came as President Donald Trump this week signed off on plans to provide direct arms to Kurdish fighters leading the military coalition.

The U.S.-backed forces' deal with Islamic State helped end a monthslong battle for Tabqa Dam, a strategic site the extremist group has held since late 2013. The Syrian Democratic Forces allowed about 70 Islamic State fighters safe passage if they dismantled hidden bombs and gave up their heavy weapons, said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman.

The SDF made the deal to protect civilians and ensure that Islamic State didn't destroy the dam, which could have posed a risk to communities in the flood zone, Capt. Davis said. But the U.S. military didn't take part in the deal or agree to ensure safe passage for Islamic State fighters, Capt. Davis said, making them fair game. As the fighters left, the U.S. military tracked them and targeted those who could be killed without potential harm to civilians, he said.

"This was an agreement for them to leave the Tabqa Dam and to leave the remaining portions of the city they held, but it doesn't change the fact that when we see ISIS fighters on the battlefield and we have a clean shot at them, we will continue to take it," he said.

Capt. Davis declined to answer whether the U.S. is bound in any way when an ally like the SDF make an agreement on the battlefield.

"I think SDF let them have safe passage out of Tabqa, but once they continued on the battlefield, I don't know if that's something we're required to honor," he said.

Coalition forces have worked closely with Syrian partners in the fight for Tabqa Dam. In March, American forces ferried SDF fighters by helicopter and boat to Tabqa so they could kick off the assault.

Seizure of the dam removes a key roadblock for the SDF, which is preparing to launch a major assault on Raqqa, Islamic State's de facto capital in Syria.

Pentagon officials have said in the past that Islamic State fighters can surrender on the battlefield, but haven't provided details on how such negotiations might proceed, or who would take the lead on such matters since local forces lead the fight in Syria and Iraq.

"The enemy is completely surrounded in west Mosul, and those who do not surrender to the Iraqi security forces will be killed there," Col. John Dorrian, spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition in Iraq and Syria said in February.

The U.S.-led coalition didn't respond to a request for comment or an explanation of policy.

Islamic State first took Tabqa Dam in 2013 and used it as a hideout for top-ranking militants and high-value prisoners with the confidence that the U.S. wouldn't bomb and possibly rupture the dam, which holds back Syria's largest reservoir, Lake Assad.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170515ed5f00017
