World
Australia Arrests Man Over Islamic State Missile Project; Police allege he offered to help develop long-range guided missile, detection system for incoming bombs

By Rob Taylor 
439 words
28 February 2017
08:46
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY—ustralia has arrested a man it says offered to help Islamic State develop a long-range guided missile and a detection system for incoming bombs.

"Police will allege that the man arrested has sought to advise ISIL on how to develop high-tech weapons capability," Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said Tuesday. He said the man was arrested in the rural town of Young, northwest of the capital Canberra, after an 18-month investigation, and that the operation wasn't related to any planned attack in Australia.

The man—n Australian-born citizen, according to Andrew Colvin, commissioner of the Australian Federal Police—as identified in local press reports as Haisem Zahab. He appeared in court later Tuesday where he was charged with two foreign-incursion offenses that carry a maximum penalty of life in prison.

He wasn't available for comment and it is unclear whether he has a lawyer.

Australia has stepped up security in recent years, giving police and intelligence agencies more power against homegrown militants. It has also sent troops and warplanes to combat Islamic State as part of the U.S.-led coalition, as well as supporting the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

The country's five-tier terrorism-threat system has been set at "probable," the third-highest level, since September 2014. That December, a gunman, later identified as Iranian immigrant Man Haron Monisj, took hostages in a Sydney cafe and held them for 16 hours before being killed by police. The cafe's manager and a female customer also died.

Since then there have been four attacks and 12 others have been disrupted, most recently in December—an Islamic State-inspired plot to set off bombs in central Melbourne. More than 50 people have been arrested on terrorism offenses.

Mr. Colvin said the man charged is an electrician who had helped an overseas network of Islamic State contacts by researching and designing a laser device "to warn against incoming munitions used by coalition forces in Syrian and Iraq" and "researching, designing and modeling systems to assist ISIL's efforts to develop their own long-range missile capabilities."

While "technically trained," Mr. Colvin said, the man has no military background or previous weapon-design experience. He has also never traveled to Syria or Iraq, but made contact with Islamic State over the internet from his home.

He will reappear in a Sydney court next week.

Write to Rob Taylor at rob.taylor@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170228ed2s001xh
