U.K. Terror Attack: Losing Ground, Terrorists Adapt

By Benoit Faucon 
510 words
25 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

With Islamic State rapidly losing territory in Syria and Iraq, the group is relying more on homegrown terrorists such as the Manchester attacker while also sending more of its fighters abroad to stir violence, Western and Middle Eastern officials warn.

The suicide bombing that killed 22 people Monday night outside a concert venue in the British city came as counterterrorism officials said they have been picking up mounting anecdotal evidence that Islamic State is redeploying its resources.

Iraqi forces have expelled the radical fighters from most of Mosul -- their last stronghold in the country -- and the group has been losing ground in neighboring Syria as well.

"As ISIS loses territory, members are returning" to Europe, said a counterterrorism official for one of Iraq's Kurdish factions, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. The official was in Austria on Tuesday briefing Western colleagues on the latest from the ground in northern Iraq. "There will be more attacks in Europe," the official predicted.

The attack came as Islamic State is facing greater difficulties operating in Europe. Some fighters, both Europeans and Syrians, have slipped away after battle and are tapping cash stashed abroad, according to recent defectors, counterterrorism officials and other experts interviewed by The Wall Street Journal.

"They are not disappearing. They are just going underground," a European security official said.

One counterterrorism consultant for the U.K. government said banks have detected surprising movements of British jihadists returning to their home country. Though they are using fake passports, cash withdrawals show they travel to Malaysia, Italy and Dublin before flying back to Britain, the consultant said.

Some Syrian Islamic State operatives have been sent to Germany to blend in with the large refugee population, a European counterterrorism official said. To move money in Europe, they have been using prepaid travel cards, the official said.

The patterns suggest Islamic State is directing them to use diverging paths so they won't be detected when they return to Europe, the consultant said. Islamic State members from Western countries are often caught when they return through Turkey.

A second European counterterrorism official said Islamic State is testing whether it can settle its members in countries where the group has no presence. Islamic State fighters have told he Journal that because the group's networks have unraveled in Europe under heightened scrutiny there, it will increase attacks around the Mideast outside the areas it controls.

Arrivals have been noticed in Sudan, Morocco and Senegal in recent months, the official said. The group is also sending Middle Eastern members because they realize most Europeans are now known to Western intelligence, according to Western counterterrorism officials, Islamic State defectors and Syrian activists.

In Germany, authorities are increasingly concerned about potential terrorists hiding among the 1.2 million asylum seekers who have entered the country in the past two years.

---

Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut, Bertrand Benoit in Berlin and Hassan Morajea in Tunis, Tunisia, contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170525ed5p0000v
