World
Qatar Lashes Back at Demands by Saudi-Led Group; Saudi Arabia says diplomatic, economic restrictions will continue until Doha revises its policies

By Sarah Kent in London and Dahlia Kholaif in Cairo 
940 words
5 July 2017
21:37
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Qatar and the four Arab nations seeking to isolate it exchanged bitter recriminations, with Doha accusing the Saudi Arabian-led bloc of waging a smear campaign and Cairo declaring that its energy-rich neighbor isn't serious about resolving the worst diplomatic crisis in the Persian Gulf in decades.

Meeting in Cairo on Wednesday, the foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates discussed Qatar's latest response to their 13-point list of demands, which include curbing diplomatic ties with Iran, severing links with the Muslim Brotherhood and closing the Al Jazeera television network.

Egyptian Foreign Minister Sameh Shukri said after the gathering that Qatar's reply had been "negative," adding that it "reflects negligence and lack of seriousness in dealing with the origins of the problem as well as unawareness of the gravity of the situation."

Qatar is facing a potential volley of new punitive measures from the four nations after signaling its rejection of the demands.

Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir told reporters in Cairo that further measures against Qatar will be taken as needed. The "political and economic blockade will continue until Qatar revises its policies," he said.

Accusing Qatar of supporting extremist groups and meddling in their domestic affairs, the four Arab states severed diplomatic relations on June 5 and imposed a transport ban on the nation of 2.2 million people. Qatari officials have consistently denied the allegations.

On Wednesday, Qatar's foreign minister, Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman Al-Thani, lashed back, saying in London that the allegations by Saudi Arabia and its allies were "clearly designed to generate anti-Qatar sentiment in the West" and that their demands didn't represent "reasonable and actionable grievances."

"Qatar continues to call for dialogue despite the siege that is a clear aggression and an insult to all international treaties bodies and organizations," Mr. Al-Thani told a gathering at the London-based think tank Chatham House . He said his country is more progressive and open than are others in the region, and its principles have made it a target.

"Unlike many states in the Middle East, Qatar was not built on oppression, fear and censorship," Mr. Al-Thani said.

When they issued their demands to Qatar on June 22, the four Arab states boycotting Qatar gave it 10 days to comply. That deadline was extended on Sunday and expired early Wednesday. Doha has responded to the demands through Kuwait, but the details of its reply haven't been made public.

The steps under consideration  by the four nations at their gathering in Cairo on Wednesday weren't known. U.A.E. Minister of State for Foreign Affairs Anwar Gargash has said Qatar could be expelled from the Gulf Cooperation Council , a six-member political and economic bloc that includes Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E., Bahrain, Qatar, Kuwait and Oman. Mr. Al-Thani said Qatar's rivals in the group couldn't suspend it because such a decision would have to be taken by consensus.

Bahrain's foreign minister, Sheikh Khalid bin Ahmed al-Khalifa, said in Cairo that Qatar's future as part of the GCC would be reviewed by the council when its six members meet, but didn't say when. "Decisions are studied carefully," he said.

Mr. Al-Thani of Qatar said its rivals in the group couldn't suspend it because such a decision would have to be taken by consensus.

Doha is seeking help from the U.S. to resolve the dispute, while Abu Dhabi and Riyadh want the U.S. to back their efforts to isolate their neighbor. The response has been mixed, stoking fears of a prolonged diplomatic crisis.

President Donald Trump has taken up the allegations against Qatar's ties to terrorism funding. Meanwhile, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has sought to defuse the standoff, urging the two sides to use the list of demands as a starting point for negotiations .

Mr. Tillerson​aid in June that the embargo on Qatar, which hosts 10,000 American troops at the largest U.S. military base in the region, was beginning to interfere in a U.S.-led military campaign against the jihadist group Islamic State.

"The blockade is hindering U.S. military actions in the region and the campaign against ISIS," Mr. Tillerson told reporters at the State Department.

Mr. al-Jubeir of Saudi Arabia said it is committed in its fight against terrorism but can't have Qatar as an ally that also "turns a blind eye towards terrorism financiers who operate openly [there]" and toward "extremists."

Qatar's economy has been resilient so far but could begin to suffer deeply if the transport ban remains in place and other economic sanctions are imposed.

Mr. Al-Thani said the country is paying 10 times its normal rate to ship food and other goods into the country via alternative routes. This week, Moody's Investors Service changed its outlook on Qatar's credit rating to negative, citing the likelihood of a "prolonged period of uncertainty."

A similar diplomatic standoff in 2014 over Qatar's alleged support for Islamist organizations that Saudi Arabia, the U.A.E. and Bahrain deemed terrorist organizations ended after eight months, with the three nations agreeing to return their ambassadors to Doha. Qatar said at the time that it made no concessions to resolve the dispute.

Write to Sarah Kent at sarah.kent@wsj.com 

Document WSJO000020170705ed750035x
