World
Man Detained in Bomb Probe Is Suspected of Being  ISIS  Fighter; Prosector said evidence suggests suspect led a 10-person unit that took part in kidnappings and killings

By Anton Troianovski 
306 words
13 April 2017
12:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN—n Iraqi man detained during the investigation into the bombing of the bus carrying the Borussia Dortmund soccer team is believed to have fought for Islamic State in Iraq, Germany's top prosecutor said Thursday, but added that no evidence has emerged showing the man participated in the attack.

The prosector-general said in a statement that evidence suggested that the 26-year-old man, identified as Abdul Beset A. joined Islamic State in Iraq around 2014 and led a 10-person unit that took part in kidnappings and killings.

Abdul Beset A. moved to Germany in early 2016 and continued to stay in contact with members of Islamic State, the prosecutor said.

The prosecutor said that while it was now seeking an official arrest warrant against Abdul Beset A. because of his suspected participation in a terrorist group, there was no evidence linking him to the Dortmund attack.

A spokesman for the prosecutor said that an initial clue suggested the man may have been involved in the attack, but subsequent investigation failed to bear that out. Instead, new evidence emerged as part of Wednesday's investigation that the man had been involved in Islamic State.

"The investigation has until now uncovered no evidence that the accused man participated in the attack," the prosecutor's statement said.

Authorities detained the man on Wednesday and searched his apartment as they hunted for clues into the bombing of the bus that was carrying the Borussia Dortmund soccer team on Tuesday. The bombing seriously injured one player ahead of a UEFA Champions League quarter-final match.

Write to Anton Troianovski at anton.troianovski@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d00231
