World
 ISIS  Claims Execution of Russian Intelligence Agent; The militant group says video shows beheading of Russian agent who had attempted to infiltrate one of its fighting units

By Thomas Grove 
606 words
9 May 2017
16:21
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSCOW—slamic State has published a video showing what it says was the beheading of a Russian intelligence agent who had attempted to infiltrate one of the extremist group's elite fighting units before he was seized.

Russia's main intelligence agency, the Federal Security Service, didn't respond to questions about the video, which was published by a media outlet affiliated with Islamic State and reported Tuesday by SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist activity.

The Wall Street Journal couldn't independently determine the videos authenticity or verify any of its claims.

Neither the date of the purported beheading nor its location are described in the video, but in response to its publication, Russia's Defense Ministry said all Russian forces in Syria were accounted for.

Russia provides crucial military support to the Syrian government of President Bashar al-Assad. Islamic State is fighting both the regime and other rebel groups, as it struggles in neighboring Iraq to hold remnants of western Mosul, its last remaining urban stronghold in that country.

The release of the video coincided with commemorations in Russia on Tuesday marking Victory Day, the anniversary of the Soviet Union's victory over Nazi Germany in World War II. One of the most important holidays on the Russian calender, it is a traditional showcase of the country's military might and its latest weaponry.

In the video, the purported victim, speaking in Russian and dressed in a black, button-down shirt with black trousers, identifies himself by name, gives his rank as captain and says he worked for the Federal Security Service, or FSB.

He says he joined an Islamist extremist group in Russia's predominantly Muslim North Caucasus region before traveling to Islamic State-controlled territory to infiltrate that organization.

He is later shown against a background of empty, rolling sand dunes. Behind him is man, his face exposed, wearing a khaki green military gear and holding a knife in his right hand.

Previous videos of executions carried out by Islamic State and whose authenticity was later confirmed show a similar landscape. Unlike nearly all of those videos, however, the supposed executioner isn't disguised.

Pro-Islamic State social media accounts said the man was taken into custody after he asked several times to join a special unit under the commander of Islamic State's former war minister, Omar Al Shishani, and aroused the suspicion of the group's police.

Mr. Putin has justified Moscow's military intervention in Syria partly as an opportunity to fight thousands of Russian Islamist extremists that have gone to Syria and Iraq to fight on the side of Islamic State.

Russia has been fighting an Islamist insurgency in its predominantly Muslim North Caucasus region since the end of the Second Chechen War in 2009. Nearly all insurgent groups in the North Caucasus have pledged allegiance to Islamic State.

At Tuesday's Victory Day parade in the Russian capital, Mr. Putin said that while Russia was prepared to deal with international terrorist threats on its own, it was also was ready to work with other countries to fight the scourge.

"Today life itself demands we boost our defense potential but for an effective battle with terrorism, extremism, neo-Nazism and other threats, we must consolidate the forces of the international community," he said in a nationally televised speech.

Nour Alakraa in Berlin contributed to this article.

Write to Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170509ed59002mi
