U.S. News: U.S. Watch

443 words
12 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DISCLOSURES

FBI Nominee Earned

$9.2 Million at Firm

President Donald Trump 's pick to run the FBI , Christopher Wray , is worth more than $23 million and will recuse himself from any investigation in which his law firm represents a party, according to ethics disclosures released on Monday.

Mr. Wray, a former senior Justice Department official, has spent the past decade as a private lawyer at the firm King & Spalding . He made $9.2 million there since January 2016, according to his financial-disclosure form.

Mr. Wray lists a total of 20 clients who paid him more than $5,000 each since January 2015, including Johnson & Johnson , Wells Fargo & Co ., Chevron , Fan Duel Inc. and Draft Kings Inc ., Alcatel-Lucent SA , Credit Suisse Group AG and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.

An ethics letter signed by Justice Department official Lee Lofthus said that if confirmed, Mr. Wray would be barred from participating in any matter involving "specific parties in which he knows that a former client of his is a party or represents a party" for one year from the date of his last work for them.

-- Aruna Viswanatha

---

IMMIGRATION

Steps Taken to Scrap

'Startup Visa' Rule

The Trump administration took steps toward scrapping a regulation that would have helped more foreign-born entrepreneurs build startups in the U.S. without a traditional visa.

The Department of Homeland Security filed a notice that it will delay the effective date of the International Entrepreneur Rule, which would have let foreign entrepreneurs apply to work in the U.S., provided their startup raised $250,000 from established U.S. investors.

The rule, enacted in the final days of the Obama administration, had been set to go into effect next week. The DHS will delay that date by eight months, a period in which it will "obtain comments from the public regarding a proposal to rescind the rule," the agency said in a Federal Register filing. The move was met with rebuke from groups representing Silicon Valley tech firms.

-- Douglas MacMillan

---

HAWAII

Soldier Is Charged

With Helping ISIS

A U.S. soldier stationed in Hawaii was charged with providing material support to Islamic State, according to a criminal complaint filed Monday in U.S. District Court in Honolulu.

Sgt. First Class Ikaika Kang, 34 years old, allegedly tried to support the terror group by passing along classified military documents to undercover FBI agents who he believed would give them to ISIS. He is accused of making combat training videos to be used to train ISIS fighters.

An attorney representing Sgt. Kang didn't respond to requests to comment.

-- Zusha Elinson

Document AWSJ000020170711ed7c00018
