Bomber Kills 22 in Britain ---  ISIS  claims role in suicide attack that targeted fans at pop concert in Manchester

By Mike Bird, Georgi Kantchev and Jason Douglas 
1,060 words
24 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANCHESTER, England -- U.K. police identified the bomber who killed 22 people and injured dozens of others Monday outside a pop concert in Manchester as a 22-year-old named Salman Abedi.

He hit one of the softest of targets: a mostly young crowd pouring from the exits after the show, police said.

Islamic State said Tuesday it carried out the attack, the deadliest in the U.K. since 2005, but its role couldn't be independently confirmed. Police had no immediate comment on the claim.

As the fans of American singer Ariana Grande streamed out of the Manchester Arena, a single assailant detonated an explosive device and unleashed carnage Monday night, according to the authorities, sending survivors fleeing as panicked parents searched for their children amid the chaos.

Ms. Grande, a former children's TV star who commands an enormous social-media presence, is popular among younger fans. Children were among the dead, and at least 12 children under the age of 16 were among the 59 injured.

School officials confirmed the deaths of two young people, an 18-year-old and an 8-year-old.

Authorities were racing in a fast-moving investigation to determine whether Abedi acted alone or was part of a broader terrorist network, said Manchester's top police officer, Chief Constable Ian Hopkins.

Police cordoned off a street in a south Manchester neighborhood where a bomb squad carried out a controlled explosion and raided an apartment in another neighborhood.

They said they arrested a 23-year-old in a third neighborhood. "I saw someone face down on the floor, and saw men struggling and cuffing him," said Majid Novin, proprietor of a nearby cafe.

It was the second terrorist attack in the U.K. this year and the deadliest since suicide bombers attacked the London transport system nearly 12 years ago, killing 52 people. Monday's bombing took place four years to the day after British soldier Lee Rigby was hacked to death outside an army barracks in London by two Islamic extremists.

In a televised address from Downing Street, Prime Minister Theresa May said Monday's attack stands out for its "appalling, sickening cowardice, deliberately targeting innocent, defenseless children and young people."

"Today, let us remember those who died and let us celebrate those who helped, safe in the knowledge that the terrorists will never win and our values, our country and our way of life will always prevail," she said.

Mrs. May met with the government's emergency committee and traveled to Manchester to meet with local leaders and authorities.

Security was heightened around the country. In Manchester, extra police were deployed and armed officers patrolled the city.

U.S. President Donald Trump expressed "absolute solidarity" with the British people. "So many young, beautiful innocent people living and enjoying their lives murdered by evil losers in life. I won't call them monsters because they would like that term," he said. "I will call them from now on losers, because that's what they are."

In its statement published online, Islamic State said it had planted an improvised explosive device to "terrorize the polytheists" in revenge for their "aggression toward Muslim countries." It identified the assailant only as a "soldier of the caliphate."

A U.S. official in Washington cast doubt on the claim, at least until more information was available. The official said the lack of details suggested the group could be claiming the attack opportunistically, rather than having any real role in its planning.

In its literature, Islamic State has deemed children legitimate targets and identified public gatherings as potential areas for attacks, said Rita Katz, the director of the SITE Intelligence Group, which monitors jihadist groups.

Two of the members of the Islamic State cell that struck Brussels and Paris in 2015 and 2016 were in Manchester months before the attacks, but a spokesman for the Belgian federal prosecutor said the cases were unrelated.

In March, an attacker authorities said was inspired by Islamist extremism targeted the Parliament, killing five people. The man mowed down pedestrians on a London bridge and fatally stabbed a police officer outside Parliament before he was shot dead.

Monday's explosion went off near the box office around 10:33 p.m. local time in a public space outside the Manchester Arena, according to police. The venue is one of the largest concert arenas in Europe, with a capacity of 21,000.

It came shortly after Ms. Grande had closed her concert with the song "Dangerous Woman," witnesses said. The lights were on and people were leaving, playing and hitting pink balloons released during the show.

The cause of the noise wasn't immediately obvious to many in the crowd.

"There was a bang. Because there were balloons all around the concert, everyone thought it was that," said Charlotte McCluskey, 13, who had been at the arena with her aunt. "Someone came on stage and told us it was just a balloon. Then people from the exits started running back in as we were running to the exit."

"The crowd sort of seemed to part, and people started running," added Dawn Moore, Ms. McCluskey's aunt.

Pictures taken on mobile phones showed concertgoers running from the arena. On social media, users posted dozens of photos of people missing after the explosion.

Ms. Grande tweeted early Tuesday, "broken. from the bottom of my heart, i am so so sorry. i don't have words." It wasn't known if she would go ahead with planned performances at London's O2 arena on Thursday and Friday.

Carol Bromfield, who came with her daughter Emily to see the concert, said she saw a young girl trampled in the surge as people rushed to flee.

"As we came out of the door, we could see the smoke coming round the auditorium, and we could see the blood on the floor," she added.

The bombing hit in the runup to national elections set for June 8. Mrs. May's Conservative Party and its main rival, Labour, said on Tuesday they would halt campaigning.

---

Wiktor Szary, Robert Wall, and Karen Leigh contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170523ed5o0001o
