Reader Center
Wildfires in Portugal, Fighting  ISIS  and Exotic Animal Hunting: The Times’ Digital Highlights From the Last Month

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
337 words
24 October 2017
20:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Two masthead editors at The Times, Steve Duenes and Sam Dolnick, have highlighted some of our best digital journalism from the last few weeks and have provided some insight into how the stories were produced.

Then and Now

Raphael Minder, The Times’ Spain and Portugal correspondent, wrote about wildfires in Portugal last summer, and he wrote about the same subject last week. It’ not hard to see the design difference between last year and this year. Take a look.

The International desk routinely creates this kind of coverage now. In this case, it originated from the London bureau, courtesy of editors Anna Holland and Anne-Sophie Bolon, and Mona Boshnaq, a photo editor.

Different Ads, Same Car

Our reporter covering advertising, Sapna Maheshwari, realized that different ads were running to promote the same car, and she wanted to highlight each ad. She and Ashwin Seshagiri, a digital editor on Business Day, sketched the layout of the piece, and she then wrote it through with another editor, Connor Ennis.

Photo Correspondents

Photographers are earning frequent bylines these days, often as part of our International report. In this case, an editor on International, Sewell Chan, speedily steered a visual piece from Ivor Prickett, a freelance photographer for The Times who has covered the conflicts in Iraq and Syria. Ivor had spent many days with a militia fighting the Islamic State to retake Raqqa. And after a long drive to Erbil, Iraq, he filed his images and an accompanying document (subject line: Text).

Hunting Ranches

A story from Texas Hill Country by our Houston bureau chief, Manny Fernandez, was also a stunning visual package, driven by a photo editor, Meghan Petersen. After coming across Ox Ranch, she did some initial reporting and got the National desk interested. Meghan edited Daniel Berehulak’ photos into a visual sequence, and Manny wove the narrative together.

Document NYTFEED020171024edao00669
