The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ The Terrible Limbo Between Attack and Credit

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
600 words
24 May 2017
11:51
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

In the early hours after the bombing in Manchester, England, we waited to find out who did it and why.

That gap —etween an act of terror and the claim of responsibility —as become a familiar, terrible sort of limbo.

My colleague Rukmini Callimachi, who covers the Islamic State, explains what we aren’ seeing during that time.

On today’ episode:

•ritain raises its terror alert to the highest level as the Islamic State claims credit for the bombing in Manchester. Ms. Callimachi tells us what happened inside the world of ISIS in the hours after the attack.

•ohn O. Brennan, the former C.I.A. director, is the latest United States official to testify about Russia. His message as he realized the presidential election was under attack: “ut it out.”att Apuzzo, who covers the C.I.A., joins to discuss.

Background reading:

•The Manchester concert bombing in pictures.

•Highlights and analysis from Tuesday’ testimony by the former C.I.A. chief.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’ enough, we can even text.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

A vigil on Tuesday for the victims of the terror attack in Manchester, England. | Andy Rain/European Pressphoto Agency 

Document NYTFEED020170524ed5o003bh
