FACT CHECK
Foreign Desk; SECTA
Niger Claims Vary From Premature to Conspiratorial

By LINDA QIU 
1,279 words
27 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Some of President Trump's liberal critics are characterizing the Oct. 4 ambush in Niger that killed four American soldiers as ''Benghazi on steroids'' -- a reference to the yearslong partisan uproar over the 2012 attacks on two United States compounds in Libya.

A few parallels can be drawn between the incidents. In each, four Americans died at the hands of Islamic extremists. After the Benghazi attacks, the Obama administration struggled to explain exactly what happened, and why. And now, President Trump and his top officials have yet to satisfy questions from Congress about the deaths in Niger, Republicans and Democrats said on Thursday.

But popular allegations about Mr. Trump's role in Niger have ranged from premature to conspiratorial.

American troops' presence in Niger predates Russia's military agreement with the country.

Liberal blog posts, shared online tens of thousands of times, falsely claim that Mr. Trump sent American troops to Niger to aid Russia. One, for example, reads: ''Four U.S. soldiers were killed in Niger two weeks ago, and no one knows what they were doing there -- except that it came shortly after Niger curiously signed a military cooperation agreement with Russia.''

Russia and Niger did agree in August to ''interact in the war on terror, exchange information on military and political issues and the issues of strengthening international security,'' according to Tass, Russia's news agency. But the United States' presence in Niger predates this agreement by years. In 2013, President Barack Obama announced that American troops had been sent to Niger's capital, Niamey, to set up a new drone base.

The ambush was not the 'direct result' of Chad's inclusion in the travel ban.

An image widely shared on Facebook and Twitter states: ''Trump arbitrarily bans Chad with travel ban. Chad withdraws troops fighting ISIS from Niger. ISIS promptly returns to Niger when Chad leaves. Four Green Berets die as a direct result.'' But the facts do not support this.

Two of the four soldiers killed in the ambush -- Staff Sgt. Dustin M. Wright and Staff Sgt. Bryan C. Black -- were Green Berets. The two others were Staff Sgt. Jeremiah W. Johnson and Sgt. La David T. Johnson.

Chad was added to Mr. Trump's updated travel ban in late September. In October -- around the same time as the ambush -- Chad withdrew troops from the Diffa region of Niger. But these troops were fighting Boko Haram in the east, while the American soldiers were fighting a different Islamic militant group in Tongo Tongo, a village hundreds of miles to the west.

''These are two completely different conflicts,'' said Laura Seay, a professor of African politics at Colby College. Geography aside, she said, there is little evidence that the militants operating in the west were emboldened by Chad's withdrawal in the east as ''they were carrying out attacks pretty regularly'' before the Oct. 4 ambush.

It's too early to conclude whether there was misconduct by the Trump administration.

Viral social media posts have called the Niger attack ''Benghazi on steroids,'' pointing to alleged misconduct by the Trump administration.

For example, one post that claims the journalist Dan Rather said that ''the Trump Pentagon gave these men bad intel, no support, outsourced rescue people.'' But there is no evidence that Mr. Rather made these remarks, and many details about the Niger ambush have yet to emerge. The Pentagon and F.B.I. are investigating the operation, including discrepancies between American and Nigerien troops' accounts about what prompted the attack.

Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said in a news conference on Monday that officials on the ground believed that ''contact with the enemy was unlikely'' before American forces set out with a Nigerien unit on a routine reconnaissance mission on Oct. 3.

''We owe you more information,'' General Dunford said, including whether forces had ''adequate intelligence, equipment and training'' and whether ''the pre-mission assessment of the threat in the area'' was accurate.

The viral posts are correct that a contractor evacuated the bodies of three soldiers killed in action, while the French flew out the wounded. Asked why American troops relied on a contractor for evacuation, Lt. Gen. Kenneth F. McKenzie Jr., the director of the Joint Staff, said last week that the United States relied on contract support around the world, but declined to give specifics about the ambush.

But it is inaccurate to suggest American troops played no role at all in the rescue mission. They, alongside French and Nigerien troops, searched for Sergeant Johnson until his body was recovered two nights later, General Dunford said.

Responses to the tragedies have differed.

Beyond the allegations about the causes of the deaths, observers like Daily Kos and the conservative commentator S.E. Cupp have pointed to the disparity between the two administrations' responses to Niger and Benghazi. The Trump administration has been more tight-lipped about the Niger attack than the Obama administration was about Benghazi, though some of the Obama administration's initial claims turned out to be incomplete.

In September 2012, militants linked to the extremist group Ansar al-Shariah attacked the United States diplomatic mission and a C.I.A. installation in Benghazi, killing Ambassador J. Christopher Stevens and three other Americans. Obama administration officials initially rejected the notion of a premeditated terrorist attack and, in the immediate days that followed, made repeated references to an anti-Muslim video as causing the unrest -- a rationale soon revealed to be not entirely accurate.

Trump officials, on the other hand, have been largely silent in the three weeks since the Niger ambush. Beyond defending his remarks to Sergeant Johnson's widow, Mr. Trump said on Wednesday afternoon that he did not specifically order the Niger mission, though he gave generals ''the authority to do what's right so that we win.'' Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, has repeatedly declined to give details about the raid during news conferences.

As for inquiries, the F.B.I. began an investigation two days after the Benghazi attacks, and the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee held a hearing about a month after. Congress conducted eight investigations of the circumstances surrounding the violence in Benghazi, the last of which concluded last year. In the end, lawmakers broadly chided the State Department for being inadequately prepared but did not find any clear misconduct that caused the deaths.

The Pentagon said the Niger incident was under investigation six days after the deadly attack. Lawmakers in both the House and Senate were briefed by two senior Pentagon officials about the details of the attack in a classified session on Thursday, and appeared divided along party lines as to whether the deaths could have been avoided.

But senators from both parties agreed that their questions have not been answered. ''They owe us more information, and I think we'll get it,'' Senator Roger Wicker, Republican of Mississippi, told CNN.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

The coffin, top, of Sgt. La David T. Johnson last week in Florida. Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., above, on Monday at the Pentagon. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOE RAEDLE/GETTY IMAGES; MANUEL BALCE CENETA/ASSOCIATED PRESS); The soldiers killed in Niger on Oct. 4, from left: Staff Sgt. Bryan C. Black, 35; Staff Sgt. Jeremiah W. Johnson, 39; Sgt. La David T. Johnson, 25; and Staff Sgt. Dustin M. Wright, 29. (PHOTOGRAPH BY U.S. ARMY) 

Document NYTF000020171027edar0004b
