Live Briefing
World; Europe
The Latest on the Manchester Bombing at Ariana Grande Concert

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,994 words
23 May 2017
02:46
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

■ The Islamic State claimed responsibility for a bombing Monday night outside the main hall of the Manchester Arena that killed 22 people and wounded 59 others. View photos from the aftermath of the attack.

■ Children and teenagers who were attending a concert by the American pop star Ariana Grande were among the dead, the police said. An 18-year-old student and an 8-year-old girl were confirmed killed in the bombing. Ms. Grande was not hurt.

■ The police say a man detonated an “mprovised explosive device”nd died at the scene. They were investigating whether he had any help and on Tuesday the police in Manchester announced that they had arrested a 23-year-old man.

■ Prime Minister Theresa May described the episode as “n appalling terrorist attack,”nd said law enforcement officers believed they knew the identity of the attacker, but were not ready to confirm his name.

What We Don’ Yet Know

The police have not released the identity of the bomber, nor have they commented on the motive of the assailant. It is also not clear whether he received help and whether he intended to kill himself.

The Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack, identifying the bomber in its statement as a “oldier of the caliphate,”ut the extent of the militant group’ connection is unclear.

We are also trying to find out:

■ How many of the 22 victims were children.

■ What gaps in security at the arena might have abetted the attack, and what could have been done to prevent it.

■ What effect the attack might have on the June 8 general election. Britain’ leading political parties agreed to suspend campaigning out of respect for the victims of the attack.

For the latest on the Manchester attack and other major news, sign up for our Morning Briefing newsletter.

Raids and an Arrest in Manchester

The police had said they believed the bomber acted alone, but investigators said they were canvassing leads and poring over surveillance footage to determine if the assailant had help or was part of a wider network. Shortly before noon on Tuesday, the police announced that they had arrested a 23-year-old man in the Chorlton-cum-Hardy neighborhood, southwest of the city center.

Hours later, the police set off a controlled explosion and raided a house in Elsmore Road, in the Fallowfield district, about 3.5 miles south of the arena.

Read more about the investigation.

—atrin Bennhold, Steven Erlanger and Ceylan Yeginsu

First Victims Are Identified

Saffie Rose Roussos, an 8-year-old from Lancashire in northwest England, was attending the Ariane Grande concert with her mother and older sister, the Lancashire County Council said on Tuesday. Saffie was killed in the attack. News reports said her mother and her sister, who is in her 20s, were being treated at a hospital for their injuries.

Earlier, Georgina Bethany Callander, an 18-year-old health and social care student, was the first victim of the Manchester attack to be identified on Tuesday. News reports said she had died with her mother at her bedside.

Read more about the victims who have been identified here.

—an Bilefsky

Some Concertgoers Are Still Missing

Others in Manchester were still appealing for help locating loved ones who had attended the concert.

We have still not found OLIVIA CAMPBELL. If you see her please contact me ASAP. pic.twitter.com/8LboKg0B2n —leshia Anne (@Hello_Leesha) May 23, 2017

The soccer club Manchester City has opened part of its Etihad Stadium to be used as an emergency facility for families awaiting news of relatives still unaccounted for. Representatives of the Greater Manchester Police and the city council were on hand Tuesday, helping to direct inquiries.

Volunteers looking to help were also directed to the stadium, about a mile east of the Manchester Arena. A number of local shops have sent food and supplies to the families waiting there.

—an Bilefsky, Philip Pan and Rory Smith

Theresa May Pledges British Way of Life Will ‘revail’

Speaking outside her Downing Street office on Tuesday, the British prime minister appealed for anyone with information about the bombing to come forward, and she vowed that Britain’ way of life would “lways prevail.”

“et us remember those who died, and let us celebrate those who helped, safe in the knowledge that the terrorists will never win,”he said in comments broadcast on television.

Mrs. May said the attack Monday evening “tands out for its appalling, sickening cowardice —eliberately targeting innocent, defenseless children and young people who should have been enjoying one of the most memorable nights of their lives.”

Queen Elizabeth II offered her “deepest sympathy to all who have been affected by this dreadful event,”nd Prince Charles also issued a statement of condolence.

—ewell Chan and Prashant S. Rao

Trump Condemns ‘orrible Morning of Death’

President Trump condemned the bombing as a “ery horrible morning of death,”nd pledged “bsolute solidarity”ith Britain.

Speaking in Bethlehem, in the West Bank, while on his first foreign trip as president, Mr. Trump said the bombing underscored the message that he had delivered over the past several days about the need to confront the threat of terrorism.

“he terrorists and extremists, and those who give them aid and comfort, must be driven out from our society forever,”r. Trump said after a meeting with Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority. “his wicked ideology must be obliterated, and I mean completely obliterated.”

.@POTUS has spoken with U.K. Prime Minister @theresa_may to offer condolences and support on behalf of the US #manchesterattack —Sean Spicer (@PressSec) May 23, 2017

—ichael D. Shear

‘veryone Started Crying and Screaming’

Laura Bruce, 18, was with her 25-year-old sister, Amy, in one of the arena’ upper tiers when they heard the explosion. “veryone below us just turned and ran,”he said. “ecause we were higher up, we could not get out for five minutes. When we came out, a man walked past us just covered in blood.”

Sophie Tedd, 25, had traveled from Darlington, England, to attend the concert with her friend Jessica Holmes. At the end of the concert, they heard a loud bang and initially wondered whether “ speaker had blown.”

Video from inside the arena showed a surreal scene of people scrambling for the exits amid pink balloons. The balloons were part of choreographed staging for Ms. Grande’ tour, after a segment with projections and lasers.

—ory Smith and Ben Sisario

False Reports Quickly Circulate

Hours after the deadly attack in Manchester, false reports about the assailant and victims started to circulate across social media, often aided by Britain’ traditional news media.

Two of the country’ newspapers reported incorrectly that a gunman had been spotted near a hospital on the outskirts of the city in northern England. The local authorities quickly debunked that report through a tweet.

As in previous attacks across Europe, including those recently in France and Germany, false reports of people looking for victims of the attack also spread rapidly, racking up thousands of likes and retweets even though the information was incorrect.

.@twitter Pls STOP trolls posting fake victim pictures #Manchester#ManchesterBombingpic.twitter.com/vfERM4IprG —hanson d'automne (@Rogue_Eyre) May 23, 2017

Other posts included photographs of Ms. Grande, portraying her —falsely —n the aftermath of the blast.

—ark Scott

The Terrorism Threat in Britain

The attack at the arena was the worst terrorist attack in Britain since the 2005 bombings of London’ buses and subway, which killed 52 people.

British authorities, who say they have foiled numerous terrorist plots, have maintained the nation’ threat level, set by MI5, the domestic intelligence service, at “evere,”he second-highest level, for months. That means the authorities considered an attack “ighly likely.”nd counterterrorism officials have been warning that as the Islamic State comes under more military pressure in Iraq and Syria, it will try to strike abroad.

—teven Erlanger

Blast Came After ISIS Plea

Last week, the Islamic State released a 44-minute video featuring fighters of different nationalities, enjoining their supporters back home to carry out acts of violence. Among them was a man identified as a British national, according to a translation of the video provided by the Middle East Media Research Institute, which tracks jihadi propaganda.

Besides the threat last week, the Islamic State has repeatedly targeted Britain in its propaganda, though with little visible effect until earlier this year.

—ukmini Callimachi

Who Is Ariana Grande?

Ms. Grande said after the attack that she was “roken.”he wrote on Twitter how sorry she was for the fans who were killed and injured in the bombing.

broken. from the bottom of my heart, i am so so sorry. i don't have words. —riana Grande (@ArianaGrande) May 23, 2017

The 23-year-old singer and actress began her career on the children’ television network Nickelodeon. She played the character Cat Valentine —hom she once described as “imple”—n the hit shows “ictorious”nd “am & Cat.”

Ms. Grande has written in a Facebook post that playing Cat Valentine had helped her transition “rom teenager to adult.”

The concert that was attacked on Monday was part of a tour to support Ms. Grande’ 2016 album, “Dangerous Woman.”eviewing the tour’ February stop at Madison Square Garden, the New York Times music critic Jon Pareles called Ms. Grande’ performance “ show of confidence, prowess and aplomb.”

—ike Ives

Reaction From Other Music Stars

Praying for everyone at @ArianaGrande's show —ATY PERRY (@katyperry) May 22, 2017

My prayers are with you Manchester —emi Lovato (@ddlovato) May 22, 2017

My thoughts, prayers and tears for all those affected by the Manchester tragedy tonight. I'm sending all my love. —aylor Swift (@taylorswift13) May 23, 2017

Arena Largest Such Venue in Britain

The Manchester Arena is the largest indoor venue in Britain, with a capacity of 21,000, or 18,000 for concerts. It was constructed as part of Manchester’ bid to host the Olympic Games in 1996 and 2000. The venue is connected to the Manchester Victoria Station, which remained closed on Tuesday.

The Pennsylvania-based company SMG manages the arena, and Wes Westley, the president and chief executive of the company, described the precautions at the venue.

“t is obviously as tight security as anywhere in the states,”e said in an interview. “ackpacks are not allowed. Drinks are taken away from people. You have to go through very strict security to enter the arena.”

He explained that attendees arrive through a large public foyer, which is where the explosion occurred. The area is often where parents wait for their children after concerts.

—en Sisario and Gerry Mullany

For more breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @nytimesworld on Twitter.

Wounded people inside the Manchester Arena after a bombing at an Ariana Grande concert Monday evening. | Press Association, via Associated Press | Police officers moved flowers left at a makeshift memorial in Manchester. | Ben Stansall/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain said on Tuesday that Britain’ way of life would “lways prevail.” Toby Melville/Reuters | Armed police officers patrolled Albert Square in Manchester. | Jeff J Mitchell/Getty Images | Ariana Grande performing in Las Vegas last year. | Kevin Winter/Getty Images | ISIS has claimed responsibility for the deadly explosion at an arena in Manchester, England, where the American pop singer Ariana Grande had been performing on Monday night. | By ROBIN LINDSAY, MALACHY BROWNE and MARK SCHEFFLER | Children, teenagers and adults tell of seeing bodies on the ground and of scrambling to escape the Manchester Arena when a bomb exploded after an Ariana Grande performance. | By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS and REUTERS 

Document NYTFEED020170523ed5n000b6
