Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 5 | On ‘o, Jane Austen Is Not Your Bestie’

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
720 words
1 August 2017
14:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Thank you to the 900 teenagers who participated in the fifth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to Preanka P., our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.

Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics that caught the eyes of our participants, and remember: you can write about any of them, or anything else published on NYTimes.com in 2017, to join the contest yourself.

Winner

Preanka P., from New Jersey, chose the Op-Ed “No, Jane Austen Is Not Your Bestie”y Howard Jacobson, and wrote:

I am exactly the obsessive “aneite”oward Jacobson criticizes in this article. When I see a headline toting Jane Austen’ name, I click on it faster than an Amazon shopper on Black Friday, eager to learn about the author’ life. While Jacobson calls for readers to stop personalizing Austen, I believe we can connect to the author and respect her legacy. Unlike other writers, Austen strayed from the pattern of swashbuckling knights and heroes to write about normal life. Readers dig into her past because her writing subject invites inquiry. We ask, why did she choose naturalism over fantasy? Did the pressure of gender stereotypes catapult her literary career?

Austen’ writing is memorable due to its shrewd word choice and signature wit. When we laugh at her humor, we acknowledge the writer’ humanity. Recognizing this, we seek to understand her life, just as the characters in her novels try to relate to one another.

Nevertheless, I agree with Jacobson’ criticism of those who refer to Jane Austen as “ane.”e’e not calling the author over for a cup of tea. We should honor her memory with her last name, even in casual conversations.

On the 200th anniversary of Austen’ death, we must recognize her enduring impact on readers. Jane Austen is not a historical figure meant to be boxed away in a museum and admired from a distance. Living on as a writer, she still connects with her readers, even after her passing.

Runners-Up

Yasmeen B. Alawadhi on “Thanks to Venmo, We Now All Know How Cheap Our Friends Are”

BrooklynWHS on “My Son, the Jihadist”

GoBlue18Maximilian on “Where Does the Time Go? You Can Find Out, if You Dare”

Brian Ham on “How Y2K Offers a Lesson for Fighting Climate Change”

Angela Pan on “ Search Results Ants Can Build an Eiffel Tower (Sort Of)”

Mackenzie Parker on ”Cholera Spreads as War and Poverty Batter Yemen”

Ellen Ryou on “The Gentler Symptoms of Dying”

Aneta Sieminski on “Simple Way to Help Low-Income Students: Make Everyone Take SAT or ACT”

ELiza White HC2017 on “The Very Hungry Caterpillars That Turned to Cannibalism”

Evan Wyman on “Something Strange in Usain Bolt’ Stride”

Honorable Mentions

Nora Al Khalif on “Afghan Children, Deprived of School, Tell of Their Deepest Fears”

Kelley B. on “Why Are Dogs So Friendly? The Answer May Be in 2 Genes.”

Christina Caruso on “‘‘ Live in a Lie’ Saudi Women Speak Up”

Kristin Cheng on “Racism Is Everywhere, So Why Not Move South?”

Erin Dong on “Another New York Diner Turns Off the Grill, a Victim of Rising Rents”

Chinenye Iroajanma on “Venus Williams, Defying Age and Skeptics, Reaches Wimbledon Final”

Andrew Johnston on “That Devious Plot to ‘ombify’ussia: The Fidget Spinner”

Kevin Jordan on “Iraqi Prime Minister Arrives in Mosul to Declare Victory Over \b ISIS\b0 ”

Irina Lee on “New York Becomes the City That Never Shuts Up”

Lipman on “Laugh and the World Laughs With You. Type ‘a,’ot So Much.”

neenadmv2022 on “Rwanda’ Soccer Sisterhood”

Megan Orlanski on “When Education Is Hijacked by War”

Nicholas Romano on “N.H.L.’ Connor McDavid, M.V.P. at 20, Is Still Pursuing His Idol”

Sophia Sacchetti on ”Britain Cracking Down on Gender Stereotypes in Ads”

Hannah So on “When Just Vanilla Won’ Do, How About a Blueberry Pie Oreo? ”

Benjamin P. Stein on “The Lawyer, the Addict”

Women in period costume with the new 10-pound note featuring Jane Austen, at Winchester Cathedral in England on Tuesday. | Pool photo by Chris J Ratcliffe 

Document NYTFEED020170801ed81002s1
