National Desk; SECT
Right and Left React to the Las Vegas Shooting and the Gun Control Debate

By JUSTIN BANK 
998 words
4 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The political news cycle is fast, and keeping up can be overwhelming. Trying to find differing perspectives worth your time is even harder. That's why we have scoured the internet for political writing from the right and left that you might not have seen.

Has this series exposed you to new ideas? Tell us how. Email us at ourpicks@nytimes.com.

For an archive of all the Partisan Writing Roundups, check out Our Picks.

From the Right

David Harsanyi in The Federalist :

''Maybe Paddock evaded or abused some gun law. Maybe it can be tightened. But those who reflexively call for more restrictive gun laws without even knowing how or why Paddock got his hands on guns -- or what kind of firearms he used -- give themselves away.''

Mr. Harsanyi argues that those calling for tighter gun control laws do themselves a disservice by reflexively demanding changes after a mass shooting. The rhetoric is heated and may mix anger toward the incidents with prescriptive solutions, he says. Mr. Harsanyi argues that ''ideological stridency and partisanship'' will never appeal to gun owners, for whom each ''law feels a lot like incremental steps to undermine access.'' Read more »

_____

Noah Rothman in Commentary :

''The American left honestly wants to see gun violence in America reduced. But appealing to the same failed tactics over and over suggests that they're only preening for the advantage of their like-minded audience. The people they need to convince tuned out years ago.''

The problems Mr. Rothman sees in the liberal approach to increasing gun control include ''displays of cultural hostility that masquerade as exhibitions of policy-oriented seriousness.'' He holds particular contempt for ''attacks on the prayerful'' because, he sarcastically posits, ''prayer for victims of violence is another waste of a few private minutes that could be spent crafting and passing new gun legislation.'' And Mr. Rothman says that the ''same failed tactics'' of persuasion will not work. Read more »

_____

Ben Shapiro in The Daily Wire :

''Good policy is good regardless of timing; bad policy is bad regardless of timing. But when something horrific occurs, it's in the interest of those pushing a related policy to suggest that those who oppose the policy somehow don't care enough about victims.''

Among the reasons that Mr. Shapiro thinks the immediate aftermath of the shooting is a poor time to talk about gun control policy: The ''motive of the shooter is still unknown,'' and ''how the shooter acquired his weapons is still unknown.'' Absent that knowledge, Mr. Shapiro suggests now is a good time to ''gather information'' and ''stay silent'' for fear of ending up ''with more heavy-handed government policy that doesn't actually achieve the end for which it supposedly aims.'' Read more »

_____

From the Left

German Lopez in Vox:

''The only way to get significant legislation passed is by staying on an issue, particularly when it's on the news, usually due to a crisis. And since mass shootings help highlight the need for gun control, they are often the only major opportunity for lawmakers to act on momentum.''

Mr. Lopez thinks that ''lawmakers can't do anything about mass shootings without politicizing them.'' The political dimensions are what allow the debate to take place. Alternately, ''the best way to keep the status quo is by making sure debates about it never get off the ground.'' Read more »

_____

Charles P. Pierce in Esquire :

''Only with the Second Amendment do we hear that the price of freedom is the occasional Stephen Paddock, locked away in his own madness on the 32nd floor of a luxury hotel and casino, deciding coolly whose brains he will blow out next a few blocks away in the 273rd such unfortunate exercise of Second Amendment rights this year.''

There are ''serious arguments about all the other parts of the Bill of Rights,'' according to Mr. Pierce. From practical limits on the free speech promised in the First Amendment to the limits of the Sixth Amendment ''that allows the states to poison convicts to death.'' Why the discrepancy? Mr. Pierce puts it plainly: ''Our leaders are afraid to tolerate limits on Second Amendment 'freedoms.' '' Read more »

_____

Richard Wolffe in The Guardian:

''This happens to be a national sickness, requiring a national series of cures. We can't pray it away. It's a public health crisis that kills more Americans than HIV, Parkinson's disease and hypertension.''

Mr. Wolffe vigorously argues for gun violence to be approached with the urgency of a public health issue. He says that ''gun violence is not an act of nature: it's not an unpredictable earthquake or unexpectedly severe hurricane.'' And that ''we don't stop talking about air safety after a passenger jet goes down. We don't stop talking about terrorism after another ISIS attack.'' But ultimately he fears that the usually fervent interest in gun rights ''trumps sanity.'' Read more »

_____

And Finally, From the Center:

Esmé. Deprez in Bloomberg:

''The well-funded NRA and its allies argue that gun regulations only hurt law-abiding gun owners because criminals simply ignore them. They note that since Congress let a ban on assault weapons expire in 2004, violent crime in America has fallen significantly, while fatal and nonfatal shootings also declined. Meanwhile, gun-control advocates (some backed by Michael Bloomberg, founder and majority owner of the Bloomberg News parent Bloomberg LP) say limiting weapons will drive down gun-related crimes.''

Ms. Deprez gives some historical and international context to the N.R.A.'s ''decades-long winning streak, convincing courts and lawmakers to loosen gun restrictions and to prevent the passage of new ones.'' Read more »

_____

Want the Partisan Writing Roundup in your inbox? Sign up for the Morning Briefing Newsletter or the What We're Reading Newsletter.

Have thoughts about this collection? Email feedback to ourpicks@nytimes.com.

Document NYTF000020171004eda40004b
