U.S.
Heroes of the Las Vegas Shooting: ‘’e Got to Go to Work’

By DANIEL VICTOR 
857 words
3 October 2017
21:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Dean McAuley had found a path to safety, but he didn’ leave. As his two friends followed the police away from the Las Vegas gunman’ view, one called back to him: “ou’e got to come with us.”

He replied, “’e got to go to work,”e said at a news conference on Wednesday.

Mr. McAuley, a firefighter from the Seattle area who went to the country music festival each year with friends, ignored warnings that bullets were still flying. He got gloves from a medical tent and helped bring two women back to the tent. He then helped Natalia Baca, 17, by operating a tourniquet and helping to put an IV in her arm.

She had a hard time breathing, but was calm. He told her to trust him, and said he wouldn’ let anything happen to her.

He let her use his phone to call her father, telling him that she would be O.K. After a man offered his car to take them to the hospital, he kept her calm by showing her pictures of his wife, son and dog.

A day later, after he spent several more hours triaging patients at the hospital, he made it home to Washington and “queezed the heck out of my wife.”e was avoiding his phone, but was relieved to get a text message from Ms. Baca’ father: “ou saved my daughter’ life.”s. Baca and her twin sister were both O.K.

“e all became one that night,”r. McAuley said Wednesday, praising the many others who worked together to help anyone they could. “ got to see one person at their worst, but I got to see and witness humanity at its best.”

His story was among the many that emerged of heroic acts, big and small, that saved lives.

Carly Krygier lay on top of her daughter to shield the girl from bullets, she told CNN. They both made it out safely.

Todd Blyleven got out, then went right back in.

“ had two arms, I had two legs, I hadn’ been shot, I was healthy and I knew people were in danger,”e told MSNBC. “nd I just needed to go back and help wherever I could.”

Sonny Melton died while protecting his wife, Heather Melton, she told WSMV-TV.

“e grabbed me and started running when I felt him get shot in the back,”he said.

Tom McIntosh said he wouldn’ be alive if not for the help of a stranger who used a belt to create a makeshift tourniquet for his wounded leg. The “oday”how found that stranger, James Lawson, and reconnected the two for an on-camera reunion. “hanks, buddy,”r. McIntosh said as they hugged.

Lindsay Lee was in the passenger seat of a truck, watching victims being carried on makeshift stretchers, when a man approached her window. “ight now, we need your truck,”e said. “e just need to get people over to the hospital, O.K.?”

“.K., go ahead, put them all in the back,”she responded.

Steve Keys, a firefighter, was performing CPR on a woman when he was grazed by a bullet. He stayed to help people instead of getting medical attention.

“lease, please, please say prayers,”he wrote on Facebook.

Jonathan Smith estimated that he led about 30 people to safety, grabbing them and guiding them away from the scene, before he was shot in the neck. He was able to walk out of the hospital, but doctors left the bullet in. “ might have to live with this bullet for the rest of my life,”he told The Washington Post.

Taylor Winston found a truck with keys inside, stole it, loaded as many victims as he could into the back seat and drove them to a hospital. After going back for another round, helping a total of 20 to 30 victims, Mr. Winston, a Marine veteran, returned the keys to the truck’ owner on Monday. [WBTW-TV]

Krystal Goddard and Amy McAslin don’ know the man who saved them. He had already been shot, but he shielded the women and held tight to them as they chanted, “verything is going to be O.K.”CNN]

Addison Short had been shot in the leg and couldn’ run. A man she didn’ know threw her over his shoulder and carried her to a taxi, which took her to the hospital. [CNN]

Meanwhile, the lines to give blood in the Las Vegas area circled blocks.

Niraj Chokshi contributed reporting.

* What We Know About the Las Vegas Shooting Victims

* False \b ISIS\b0  Connections, Nonexistent Victims and Other Misinformation in the Wake of Las Vegas Shooting

* A Burst of Gunfire, a Pause, Then Carnage in Las Vegas That Would Not Stop

* Country Stars React to Las Vegas Shooting: ‘ Cannot Express How Wrong I Was’

A person injured in the shooting was tended to at Tropicana Avenue and Las Vegas Boulevard on Monday. | Ethan Miller/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171003eda3005xx
