Reader Center
The Times’ Digital Highlights From the Last Week

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
398 words
7 November 2017
22:08
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Reader Center is a newsroom initiative that is helping The Times build deeper ties with our audience.

Two masthead editors at The Times, Steve Duenes and Sam Dolnick, have highlighted some of our best digital journalism from the last week and have provided some insight into how the stories were produced.

A Glimpse Into a Secret Society

As the world tried to understand the motivations of the suspect in the New York truck attack, Rukmini Callimachi, our correspondent who covers Al Qaeda and the Islamic State, put The Times far ahead of the competition.

The federal complaint suggested that the suspect visited secret Islamic State channels on the messaging app Telegram. Rukmini, a frequent Telegram user, figured that many readers may not use the app or know how it works, so she learned how to record her own phone screen and then embedded a video of her phone as she scrolled through Telegram channels. The short clip allowed her to show secret communication channels, rather than just describe them.

A New Gift Guide

The holiday stalwart got an overhaul this year thanks to a collaboration between Smarter Living and Wirecutter. For this year’ Holiday Gift Guide, the team organized more than 300 gifts —rom practical to whimsical —n a range of prices; created a platform that can be used for all gifting occasions through the year; and made it easy for readers to use, allowing them to browse by category and by price. You can also buy directly from the guide.

Visual Styles

Styles has a long tradition of strong visuals in print, and the era of Choire Sicha, our new Styles editor, is showing lots of promise when it comes to digital narratives that smartly integrate photos and short videos. The best recent examples, “s Fall Dead?” and “ild Horses and the Inmates Who ‘entle’hem,” demonstrate a skillful handling of the relationship between images and words.

A note to readers who are not subscribers: This article from the Reader Center does not count toward your monthly free article limit.

* Wildfires, Fighting \b ISIS\b0  and Exotic Animal Hunting: The Times’ Digital Highlights From the Last Month

* Is Fall Dead?

* Wild Horses and the Inmates Who ‘entle’hem

* What New York Attack Suspect’ Words May Say About \b ISIS\b0  Ties

Document NYTFEED020171107edb7007sl
