Trump To Arm Kurdish Fighters In Syria

By Dion Nissenbaum, Gordon Lubold and Julian E. Barnes 
763 words
10 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

President Donald Trump approved plans to directly arm Kurdish fighters battling Islamic State in Syria, U.S. officials said, paving the way for an offensive against the extremist group's de facto capital but angering Turkish allies who view the Kurdish fighters as terrorists.

After months of internal debate, Mr. Trump on Tuesday approved a proposal to arm the YPG, the Syrian Kurdish militia that the U.S. military considers its most reliable military ally in the country.

But Turkey, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, considers the YPG to be a terrorist group that threatens its borders, and it has long opposed the U.S. plans.

The decision sets the stage for the YPG and its Arab allies to launch an offensive on Islamic State in Raqqa, one of the extremist group's last major strongholds in the region.

Top Turkish officials on Monday visited the White House for a tense meeting to discuss the U.S. plans.

On Tuesday, the Pentagon said the U.S. is moving ahead with the plans, despite Turkish objections.

"We are keenly aware of the security concerns of our coalition partner Turkey," said Dana White, the chief Pentagon spokeswoman. "We want to reassure the people and government of Turkey that the U.S. is committed to preventing additional security risks and protecting our NATO ally."

The move to arm the YPG comes one week before Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan is scheduled to fly to Washington to meet Mr. Trump. Privately, some Turkish officials said Mr. Erdogan might cancel his plans because of the White House decision, but it remains unclear what impact the move could have on next week's meetings.

White House press secretary Sean Spicer said he didn't know if Mr. Trump had yet discussed the issue with Mr. Erdogan but said the U.S. is committed to protecting Turkey from additional security risks. "The fight for Raqqa will be long and difficult . . . and another step towards eliminating ISIS."

Two weeks ago, over American objections, Turkish warplanes bombed YPG forces who work alongside U.S. special operations forces in Syria, killing at least 18 fighters. U.S. officials said Turkey gave them less than an hour's notice of the planned attack, which gave them little time to ensure that American forces were out of harm's way.

In a risky attempt to defuse tensions, the U.S. military started patrolling in Syria near the Turkish border after the Turkish airstrikes. Turkish officials said they would continue to attack the YPG in Syria, despite U.S. objections.

The U.S. military began working with the YPG in 2014 when it dropped weapons and ammunition for the Kurdish fighters battling Islamic State in Kobani, a small Syrian town on the border with Turkey.

Since then, the U.S. has steadily stepped up its support for the YPG by carrying out airstrikes to aid the fighters. The YPG now leads a Kurdish-Arab coalition known as the Syrian Democratic Forces that has largely encircled Raqqa.

Because of Turkey's concerns, the U.S. has since stopped short of directly arming the YPG -- until now.

The decision sets the stage for the U.S. military to provide the YPG with more firepower to take on Islamic State.

The U.S. will provide small arms, ammunition and machine guns, and possibly some nonlethal assistance, such as light trucks, to the Kurdish forces, a U.S. official said.

Many of the arms and other shipments of equipment have been pre-positioned in anticipation of a decision to arm the Kurdish force, U.S. officials have said.

Once the shipments of the arms begin in coming weeks, they will be provided to Kurdish forces in increments as a way of building trust and ensuring that the shipments don't exceed the capability of the Kurdish forces to absorb them, said the U.S. official.

"We will be supplying them only with enough arms and ammo to accomplish each interim objective," said the U.S. official.

Although Kurdish forces are highly regarded and trusted by U.S. special-operations forces, the arms will still be parceled out, at least initially, in what the U.S. official characterized as "drop, op, and assess" approach. That means the shipments will be dropped, an operation will be performed, and the U.S. will assess the success of that mission before providing more arms, the U.S. official said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170510ed5a0000o
