World News:  ISIS  Holdouts Are Hit in Iraq, Lebanon --- Campaign to eradicate Sunni extremists reflects incongruous battlefield alliances

By Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut and Ali Nabhan and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad 
855 words
21 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A disparate collection of forces have launched two separate offensives against Islamic State, solidifying a de facto alliance between longtime opponents Iran and the U.S. to drive the group from the last remaining territory it holds.

Iraqi forces early Sunday started a military operation in Tal Afar, one of Islamic State's last important strongholds in the country. The offensive unites U.S.-backed Iraqi forces with Iran-supported Shiite militias, which have for months surrounded Tal Afar waiting to move on the city.

A similar dynamic is playing out in Lebanon, where the U.S.-supported Lebanese military attacked Islamic State's last foothold in the country. Hezbollah, a Lebanese militia fighting in Syria alongside Iranian forces, hit Islamic State from the other side of Lebanon's border.

Eliminating the Sunni extremist group -- whose claim of responsibility for last week's attacks in Spain suggested its continued capacity to strike abroad -- is a prime objective of both the U.S. and Iran, even though Tehran and Washington are also working to undermine each other in the region.

The competing priorities, for the U.S. in particular, have become a difficult balance.

"This is where the contradiction comes in, in U.S. foreign policy, fighting both ISIS and Iran," said Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi, a research fellow at the Middle East Forum, using an acronym for Islamic State. "The U.S. can support the armies of the region, but it won't be able to counter Iran's work with the militias of the region, both of which are important to the battle against ISIS."

Parts of these incongruous alliances are sometimes turning on each other.

In Iraq, Shiite militias have helped Baghdad's military -- backed by U.S. forces on the ground -- clear towns and cities of Islamic State. Yet across the border in Syria, these Iraqi militias have clashed with U.S. Special Forces and their Syrian allies, turning Syria into one of the hottest flash points for American-Iranian confrontation in the region. Iran, Hezbollah and many of Iraq's major Shiite militias support the Damascus government.

Tal Afar has been a showcase for this tense tangle of friends and foes.

The U.S. has pushed for Iraq's military to lead the Tal Afar assault and sideline the Iraqi Shiite militias that have encircled the town for months, but Iran has pressured Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi to include them in the battle.

Iraq's elite counterterrorism forces -- which are largely trained and equipped by the U.S. -- are depleted after a grueling battle to recapture Iraq's second-largest city, Mosul. That nine-month fight wrapped up in July, but the withered ranks of Iraq's elite troops may force Baghdad to rely more on the Shiite militias in Tal Afar.

When Mr. Abadi announced the start of the battle in the early morning hours, he was vague on what role the Shiite militias would play.

"I tell all our fighters and the Iraqi people: You're on the victorious side and the world supports you and awaits your victory," Mr. Abadi said. "The international coalition will support you."

It wasn't clear how many Islamic State fighters remain in Tal Afar, but Iraq's Defense Ministry estimates there are as many as 1,500.

Iraqi forces are bombing the militants' defensive lines as they advance toward Tal Afar, while ground fighting is taking place in areas and villages around it, Iraqi military officials said. A small area outside the town called Al Abra Al Sageera was taken by the federal police and Shiite militias Sunday morning, they added.

In Lebanon, the latest offensive is a test for the army to prove it is able to clear Islamic State from the border region with Syria. While the army is leading the assault in the country's al-Qaa and Ras Baalbek areas, Hezbollah remains an important force in pressuring the group from the Syrian side of the border -- despite repeated assurances from government officials that the military would lead the battle.

The Lebanese military denies cooperating with Hezbollah. Hezbollah frequently points to the military's weakness as a reason for its existence. Its critics accuse the militia of undermining the military.

"Hezbollah is taking the lead in everything, the government is powerless, even the state institutions are not able to do anything," said Samy Gemayel, a parliamentarian and head of the Kataeb party, a Christian party opposed to Hezbollah.

The U.S. has tried to strengthen the Lebanese and Iraqi militaries through equipment and training, but the governments of both countries are forced to compete with Iran's donations to their irregular forces.

With Islamic State a diminished force, U.S. officials now worry Tehran will try to establish a route from the Iranian capital through Iraq, Syria and onto Lebanon to provide military aid to proxies and allies.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170821ed8l0000m
