World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Executive Editor Matt Murray.

By Matt Murray 
1,149 words
11 August 2017
12:24
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Gerard Baker is away. Today's 10-Point is by Executive Editor Matt Murray. Follow him on Twitter@MurrayMatt.

Good morning,

Tech Turmoil

Benchmark Capital, one of Uber's largest shareholders, sued the ride-sharing company's former chief executive, Travis Kalanick, alleging he defrauded directors into giving him more control over the board. The suit centers on a June 2016 decision by Mr. Kalanick to expand the board to 11 seats from eight, effectively giving him power over the designation of those seats, the venture-capital firm said. Benchmark said it never would have authorized that move had it known about the company's "gross mismanagement and other misconduct at Uber." Mr. Kalanick's spokesman said the lawsuit is without merit. Elsewhere, Googlecanceled a companywide meeting about diversity just before it was set to begin, saying right-wing websites published the names of employees who had proposed questions, raising security concerns. And Snap said its quarterly loss nearly quadrupled on slowing revenue and user growth, sapped by intensifying competition from larger rival Facebook.

Funding Terror

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged \b ISIS\b0  operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit. The alleged recipient of the funds was a U.S. citizen who had been arrested more than a year ago after an FBI surveillance operation. The government alleged in a 2016 indictment that the suspect, Mohamed Elshinawy, pledged allegiance to Islamic State and had pretended to sell computer printers on eBay as a cover to channel payments for Islamic State through PayPal, potentially to fund terror attacks. Mr. Elshinawy has pleaded not guilty to supporting the terror group, and currently is in federal custody awaiting trial. But the case suggests how Islamic State is trying to exploit holes in the vast online financial world to finance terror outside its borders.

Summer Jobs

Jamaicans and other foreign workers have long powered the summer economy in the upscale tourist haven of Martha's Vineyard, Mass. This year, a scarcity of the H-2B visas used to bring foreign seasonal workers to the U.S. has affected many resorts and other businesses that depend on such workers, including Alaskan fisheries. As President Donald Trump presses to restrict immigration, Martha's Vineyard serves as a small-scale experiment in what can happen when labor markets that depend on foreign workers no longer have access to as many of them. This summer, businesses on the island managed to muddle through. Some employers recruited foreign workers through other means. Others say the crunch has pushed them to try harder to hire Americans—omething opponents of the H-2B visa program favor. However, employers and other residents say filling temporary jobs with local workers is hard because people who live on the island full time want year-round employment.

Shore to Door

The shore is an appealing destination for many people, though less so when the return trip involves climbing hundreds of steps. Homeowners with waterfront properties on the bluffs of Malibu and the dunes of Lake Michigan are tackling this problem by installing incline elevators to whisk visitors from dockside to deck. The elevators are expensive, ranging from $50,000 to $250,000, not counting local permit costs that can reach as high as $20,000. However, manufacturers and installers are benefiting from the surging values of waterfront homes and the aging population of homeowners. The president of one such company, Hill Hikers, says residential sales have roughly doubled compared with five years ago, primarily thanks to baby boomers looking for ways to get around more easily as they age.

Today's Video

Taxing Subject

U.S. companies are holding more than $2.6 trillion in profits across the globe and they haven't paid U.S. taxes on it. Why is so much money offshore, and how could the tax code be changed to bring it back? Our tax reporter Richard Rubin dives in.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Trump Hotel in Washington Saw Strong Early 2017 Profit

In Kansas, a Very Fresh Face Is Running for Governor

WORLD

Italy Sees Signs of Migrant Tide Turning

In China, Surveillance Feeds Become Reality TV

BUSINESS

Amazon and Whole Foods: What's Next?

Counterfeiters Cast a Shadow on Booming Sales of Eclipse Glasses

MARKETS

Why Goldman Sachs Seized a Client's 217-Foot Yacht

Embattled Wells Fargo Board Plans Shake-Up

Number of the Day

82,000

The approximate number of rental homes that will be owned by Invitation Homes and Starwood Waypoint Homes after a proposed merger that would create the largest private owner of single-family homes in the U.S.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on how the scarcity of H-2B visas is affecting towns and industries that rely on foreign seasonal workers? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Hillary Canada

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question about technology titans such as Facebookcopying smaller rivals, Dave Miller of Michigan said: "There should be an opportunity here for copyright and patent law to protect the intellectual achievements of the tech startups. Without that, there is nothing to stop the deep-pocketed tech titans from copying anything they see as potentially lucrative." Oscar Girola of Argentina weighed in: "Every company has the right to act freely as long as it does not infringe any law or regulation." Joey Delaney of Minnesota wrote: "As a sophomore entrepreneurship major, seeing industry titans destroy little startups is a frightening thing. It is imperative that the government creates a good balance of limiting the big companies, while freeing up the little ones to instill proper competition in every industry." And Austin Delsi of New York commented: "I understand the rationale as to why the large-scale technology companies are imitating their rivals as opposed to acquiring them, but that doesn't mean it's a healthy norm for the startup landscape."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170811ed8b001gu
