REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
This Time, Terror Hits Spain

365 words
18 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Terror attacks in Europe have been concentrated in the north in recent years, but Thursday's attack in Barcelona shows that the danger continues elsewhere. The incident, in which one or more attackers drove a van into a crowd, bears the hallmarks of the terrorism afflicting Britain, France, Belgium and Germany. Islamic State (ISIS) claimed responsibility.

Officials say at least 13 people have died and dozens have been injured. The attack occurred on Las Ramblas, a wide pedestrian boulevard popular with tourists in the height of Europe's summer vacation season. Terrorists have discovered that vehicles can be effective weapons. Trucks killed 86 in Nice, France, and 12 in Berlin in 2016, and cars and vans featured in a spate of deadly sprees in London and Paris. ISIS offers a how-to manual online for this type of attack.

Spain last suffered a major attack in 2004, when al Qaeda killed 191 on commuter trains in Madrid. That group was trying to punish Spain for joining America's coalition against the Taliban in Afghanistan and to sway an election. But Spain remains an Islamist target no matter its foreign policy. The Iberian peninsula was under Islamic rule for centuries, and extremists aspire to reconquer it.

They lack the military means to do so, but an internet connection is the only tool groups such as ISIS need to radicalize individuals or small groups. Such cells can act quickly and with little of the planning and coordination that might call them to the attention of police.

Defeating ISIS in Syria and Iraq will diminish the group's power to inspire. But authorities warn that it could take a generation or more for extremism to burn itself out in the West. Governments in Europe in particular will have to accelerate their crackdown on funding for extremist preaching and ramp up support for deradicalization.

Europe has also come late to the use of big data, tighter border checks and other counterterror techniques. The dangers are continental, not national, and authorities across Europe have to better coordinate their efforts to protect their public squares from mass murder.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170818ed8i0000z
