Business/Financial Desk; SECTB
Streaming Services Struggle to Root Out Music That Incites Hatred

By BEN SISARIO 
672 words
18 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A deadly crime is committed by a white supremacist, and the ensuing media coverage draws attention to a dark corner of the music world: white-power rock bands, whose songs are widely available online and are often used as recruiting tools for extremist groups.

This week, after the march of white supremacists in Charlottesville, Va., that led to three deaths, Spotify removed an unspecified number of songs that it said incited hatred and violence.

But the phenomenon is hardly new. And the persistence of this music -- a genre sometimes called hatecore -- points to the difficulties that online media platforms have in policing their content, and to the frustrations of activists and the mainstream music industry in trying to bar hate speech from the most popular online channels.

In a statement, Spotify said that it did not tolerate content that ''favors hatred'' or incites violence on the basis of race, religion or sexuality, and added that it ''takes immediate action to remove any such material as soon as it has been brought to our attention.''

Yet similar material had been around for years. It last came to wide public notice in 2012, after six people were killed at a Sikh temple outside Milwaukee by a white supremacist who played guitar in hatecore bands.

And three years ago, the Southern Poverty Law Center issued a detailed report that identified 54 such bands whose songs were sold on iTunes. Apple removed that music from its store, but the law center, which tracks racist and hate groups, criticized Spotify and Amazon as being ''slow to act.''

Spotify removed the songs shortly after Digital Music News, an industry site, named dozens of white supremacist groups whose songs were available on the service.

For online music services, determining exactly what should be removed is one complication. Spotify relies on official lists of offensive material, like the one kept by the Federal Review Board for Media Harmful to Minors in Germany.

Another factor is Silicon Valley's tendency to favor free speech. And in studying a subculture rife with code words, it can be difficult to pinpoint hate speech, some analysts say.

''Identifying National Socialist black metal from regular black metal is not always easy,'' said Mark Pitcavage, a senior research fellow at the Anti-Defamation League who has studied hatecore groups.

The problem is more complex when it comes to YouTube, which lets users upload material themselves and relies on users to flag offensive content for removal. Those policies, and the site's sheer size, have made YouTube particularly popular with hate groups, said Keegan Hankes, an analyst at the law center.

''This whole scene has moved on to YouTube,'' Mr. Hankes said, adding that the site has become ''an encyclopedia of hate music.''

A quick scan of YouTube shows many songs by well-known hate groups. A search for Skrewdriver, one of the most notorious of these bands, turned up thousands of listings, with tracks that were uploaded as long as nine years ago and have garnered hundreds of thousands of views.

In a statement, a YouTube spokeswoman said that the service, which is owned by Google, has ''clear policies that prohibit content like hate speech and incitement to commit violent acts, and we remove videos violating these policies when flagged by our users.''

Hatecore songs may make up a tiny fraction of the content available on YouTube, but the site has also been criticized as a gathering place for far-right agitators and an outlet for ISIS recruitment. YouTube's sheer size -- more than 400 hours of video are uploaded every minute, the company says -- and the site's position as a bastion of free speech make it particularly difficult to remove hate speech, its advocates say.

Spotify's headquarters in Stockholm. The streaming music service this week removed an unspecified number of songs it said promoted hatred and violence. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JONATHAN NACKSTRAND/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170818ed8i0006g
