World News: Islamic State Claims Istanbul Shootings --- Extremist group says it targeted Turkey to retaliate for military campaign in Syria

By Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut and Emre Peker in Istanbul   
702 words
3 January 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

Islamic State claimed responsibility Monday for a New Year's attack on an upscale Istanbul nightclub that killed at least 39 people, saying it targeted Turkey in retaliation for military operations against the extremist group in neighboring Syria.

Turkish security forces said they were hunting for the lone gunman who opened fire with an assault rifle on revelers in a popular party spot overlooking the Bosporus before ditching his weapon and slipping away early Sunday.

Authorities released two photographs of the suspect, a young looking male with short hair and no significant beard or mustache, clad in a puffy, black winter jacket.

After President Recep Tayyip Erdogan chaired a regular cabinet meeting Monday, Deputy Prime Minister Numan Kurtulmus said authorities have the suspect's fingerprints and basic appearance and are close to identifying him. He said eight other people were detained in connection with the attack, and were being questioned Monday by the counterterrorism police.

Islamic State's propaganda arm characterized the gunman as a "soldier of the caliphate" and attributed the group's actions to Turkish airstrikes and artillery attacks it says have killed Muslims.

"It is natural for ISIS to claim this," a Turkish official said of Sunday's attack. ISIS is an acronym for Islamic State. But the official pointed to a discrepancy in the group's statement, which said the attacker used grenades. Authorities said only a firearm was used. The official said it was too soon to say definitively the militant group mounted the attack.

Islamic State hasn't previously said it was responsible for attacks blamed on it by Turkish authorities.

Turkey's military, along with Syrian rebels, has been fighting Islamic State in Syria in a push that Turkish officials say has killed more than 1,000 militants since it began in August. The campaign was launched after a suicide bombing at a wedding that killed more than 50 people. Turkey blamed the attack on the jihadist group.

Turkish forces are now closing in on the extremists' stronghold of al-Bab and Turkish jets and artillery pounded Islamic State targets on Monday, the military said.

The government, in what has become an increasingly routine step, has imposed a media ban on coverage of the New Year's attack, prohibiting reporting of information other than what is released by authorities. The country imposed a state of emergency after the failed coup attempt in July.

Turkey, a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, has been an important ally of the U.S. in the battle against Islamic State in Syria, and has been the target of a series of terrorist attacks. The attacks, some of which were carried out by Kurdish insurgents, have killed more than 300 people over the past year.

The two biggest of the three opposition parties in parliament called on the government to account for security failures in the wake of the New Year's attack, charging the administration with failing to fulfill its responsibilities as some lawmakers called for the cabinet's resignation.

The public response to the attack was a display of unity, with celebrities, politicians and popular media outlets condemning the attack and calling for solidarity. Yet some people also took to social media to condemn the government and its conservative supporters. Turkish leaders have characterized the attack as an attempt to foment unrest in the multicultural and ethnically diverse society.

Previous attacks inside Turkey thought to have been the responsibility of Islamic State have killed and wounded scores of Muslims. On Monday, Islamic State portrayed the New Year's attack as an assault on Christians. It described the targeted Reina nightclub as "one of the most well-known nightclubs where Christians were celebrating their pagan holiday."

According to Turkish authorities, 26 of the 39 victims were Turkish dual nationals or foreigners, including people from Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon, India, Belgium, Morocco, Iraq, Tunisia, Kuwait, Russia, Syria, Canada and Israel.

---

Noam Raydan and Ali A. Nabhan contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170103ed1300010
