World
Trump, Reshaping Syria Policy, Sets Aside Demand for Assad's Ouster; White House, State Department deliver parallel messages emphasizing U.S. focus in Syria is on fighting Islamic State

By Felicia Schwartz 
680 words
1 April 2017
18:16
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—enior Trump administration officials, reshaping U.S. policy in the Middle East, have declared formally in recent days that Washington no longer is focused on the ouster of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad as a priority.

The White House and State Department have delivered parallel messages emphasizing that Mr. Assad's fate is up to the Syrian people and that the U.S. focus in Syria is primarily on fighting Islamic State. The stance reinforces the position voiced by President Donald Trump during his presidential campaign and formalizes a turn away from Obama administration policy, which had shifted over the years.

Former President Barack Obama for several years called for Mr. Assad's immediate ouster. But that approach was frustrated as the Syrian civil war dragged on, Russia's role expanded and the war against Islamic State picked up. By the end of Mr. Obama's second term, as U.S. diplomatic efforts faltered, his administration acknowledged that Mr. Assad likely would remain in power, possibly through a political transition. But even then, they said Mr. Assad couldn't be part of a new, post-transition, government in Syria.

By contrast, the Trump administration's policy, articulated by top officials, has excluded any judgment on Mr. Assad's future role.

Following statements over the past week by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley, White House press secretary Sean Spicer said Friday said the Trump administration's policy was shaped by "political reality."

"We lost a lot of opportunity [in] the last administration with respect to Assad and I think that our statement that both U.N. Ambassador Haley gave yesterday and Secretary of State Tillerson reflects the reality," Mr. Spicer said. "We need to focus on now defeating ISIS."

During a visit Thursday to Turkey, Mr. Tillerson said: "I think the status and the longer-term status of President Assad will be decided by the Syrian people."

Ms. Haley said later at the United Nations that the U.S. priority is "no longer to sit there and focus on getting Assad out."

"Our priority is to really look at how do we get things done, who do we need to work with to really make a difference for the people in Syria." she said.

Mr. Tillerson and Ms. Haley both were critical of Mr. Assad during their confirmation hearings, and Ms. Haley, speaking earlier this week at the Council on Foreign Relations in New York, highlighted the brutality of Mr. Assad's assault on Aleppo, his forces' destruction of hospitals, and his use of chemical weapons. Still, she described the question of Mr. Assad's ouster as "been there, done that."

"This is hardly a surprise," said Phil Gordon, a former Obama White House aide on the Middle East now at the Council on Foreign Relations. "Trump has made clear for a long time that he thought the U.S. trying to change regimes is a bad idea."

He added: "Trump has aligned himself with Russia's views that the way you defeat terrorists in Syria is through force and bombing them."

European officials have said they are seeking clarity from the Trump administration about ongoing talks in Geneva on a Syrian political transition. Mr. Tillerson hasn't gotten involved in the Syria diplomacy the way former Secretary of State John Kerry.

Rep. Eliot Engel (D., N.Y.), the senior Democrat on the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said he was disappointed by the Trump administration's apparent shift.

"At a time when the United States seeks to push back on Iran in the region, the Trump administration is empowering Tehran's most useful friend and ally," he said. "Assad, along with his partners in Moscow and Tehran, are cheering America's new policy, while the people of Syria are denied justice."

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170401ed410015p
