World
Islamic State Claims Responsibility for Deadly Attack in Southern Iraq; Gunmen stormed a restaurant after blowing up a car bomb, killing 84 people and wounding almost 100

By Ghassan Adnan, Ali A. Nabhan and Isabel Coles 
676 words
15 September 2017
12:19
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD—unmen stormed a restaurant in southern Iraq after blowing up a car bomb outside, killing 84 people, an Iraqi official said, in an attack for which Islamic State has claimed responsibility.

Thursday's attack, along a highway near the southern city of Nassiriya, was one of the deadliest in the country in recent months and comes as Islamic State's days of ruling over vast areas of Iraq near an end.

The Sunni Muslim extremist group claimed responsibility for the assault, saying three groups of fighters clad with explosive belts had killed "rejectionist idolaters"—lurs it uses to denote Shiite Muslims.

Almost 100 people were wounded and 84 people were killed, according to Jasim Al Khalidi, head of the provincial health directorate.

An interior ministry official said a bomb first exploded in the restaurant parking area. Gunmen disguised as members of Iraq's paramilitary forces then got out of a second vehicle and entered the restaurant, opening fire on diners. The second vehicle subsequently blew up.

Eight Iranians were killed, according to Iran state television. They had stopped for a rest on their way to visit Shiite shrines in southern Iraq, an Iraqi interior ministry official said.

Photographs from the scene showed people carrying human remains away in blankets and mangled frames of vehicles impacted by the blast. Inside the restaurant, a security forces member held up what appeared to be a blood-soaked tablecloth.

Iran's foreign ministry strongly condemned the attacks.

"The organizations in charge, including the Iranian embassy in Baghdad, are examining the details of the incident and identity of the martyrs and injured people," foreign ministry spokesman Bahram Ghasemi was quoted as saying by the official Islamic Republic News Agency.

Islamic State has carried out hundreds of attacks across Iraq, and continues to pose a threat, despite losing most of the Iraqi territory it seized in 2014 as it declared a modern-day caliphate.

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces routed the militants from Mosul, the largest city under their control, in July, and last month retook the insurgent bastion of Tal Afar.

The group is also under pressure in neighboring Syria, where a Kurdish-led militia is chipping away at its operational base, Raqqa.

Facing defeat on the battlefield, Islamic State is expected to return underground and revert to conventional insurgent tactics using sleeper cells to carry out bombings and assassinations. The group has also directed its followers in the West to strike targets there.

Thursday's attack bore the hallmarks of Islamic State "aiming at causing maximum casualties among people," said Yahya Al Nassiri, governor of Dhi Qar province, where it took place. Security forces had succeeded in foiling other plots in the province, he said. Southern Iraq, where most of the country's oil is produced, is relatively secure in comparison with other parts of the country.

Provincial lawmaker Khalid Al Asadi blamed "weak intelligence work" and carelessness by security forces controlling checkpoints for failing to avert the attack. Frequent guerilla-style attacks by Islamic State have in the past fueled anger among Iraqis toward the government of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, who is seeking to capitalize on victory over the militants to outmaneuver his political rivals.

A massive July 2016 Islamic State blast in Baghdad's central Karrada neighborhood killed some 300 people, the single deadliest vehicle bombing in Iraq since the U.S. invasion in 2003. It fueled public outcry over the country's weak security, leading protesters to heckle Mr. Abadi at the site. Earlier that year, demonstrators in the capital called for government reform.

Aresu Eqbali contributed to this article.

Write to Isabel Coles at isabel.coles@wsj.com

READ MORE

* Islamic State Is Near Defeat in Iraq, Prime Minister Says (June 29, 2017)

* Beyond Syria and Iraq, Faraway \b ISIS\b0  'Provinces' Fight On (July 20, 2017)

Document WSJO000020170914ed9e0048u
