National Desk; SECTA
Executive Order Toughens Some Facets of Lobbying Ban and Weakens Others

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT and ERIC LIPTON; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting. 
847 words
29 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Trump on Saturday signed an executive order that strengthens certain restrictions on lobbying that had been adopted under President Obama, while weakening others.

Executive branch employees, including those in the White House, will now be barred for five years after they leave government from lobbying the federal agency where they worked. Under Mr. Obama, they had to wait until the end of the administration, meaning a shorter ban for some departing officials. Former executive branch officials will now also be permanently banned from serving as foreign lobbyists.

''Most of the people standing behind me will not be able to go to work,'' Mr. Trump joked about their prospects after serving in the White House during a short signing ceremony in the Oval Office as advisers -- including his chief strategist, Stephen K. Bannon, and counselor, Kellyanne Conway -- stood behind him.

Mr. Trump also signed two other memos. One outlined a reorganization of the National Security Council that appeared to include a significant change from the Obama administration, one that would expand Mr. Bannon's power in the administration.

It said that Mr. Bannon, the former head of Breitbart News, would be among the ''regular attendees'' at ''principals committee'' meetings -- the interagency forum for cabinet-level officials to discuss national security policy. But the director of national intelligence and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff ''shall attend where issues pertaining to their responsibilities and expertise are to be discussed.'' Under Mr. Obama, the officials in those two positions were invited to all meetings.

The other memo directed the Pentagon to come up with a ''comprehensive plan'' in the next 30 days to defeat the Islamic State.

In a subtle change, the Trump administration also apparently did away with the acronym used by the Obama administration to refer to the terrorist group -- ISIL, which stands for the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant.

The documents that Mr. Trump signed on Saturday referred to the group as ISIS, shorthand for the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. The Levant denotes an area larger than Syria.

Mr. Trump's ethics policy also has provisions that will affect officials while they are working in the government. As part of the order he signed, executive branch employees will be barred for two years from working on any ''particular matter'' that they had been involved in while in the private sector. That is the same amount of time that Mr. Obama imposed on officials who worked for him.

Mr. Trump's measure would prohibit Rex W. Tillerson, who has been nominated to serve as secretary of state, from playing any role in matters related to Exxon Mobil, where until recently he had served as chief executive.

The provision may also limit matters that Scott Pruitt, who has been nominated to lead the Environmental Protection Agency, can take up. Mr. Pruitt, who served as Oklahoma's attorney general, has repeatedly sued the agency.

Norman L. Eisen, the ethics lawyer when Mr. Obama arrived in the White House and the chief author of the rules that Mr. Trump is now replacing, commended much of Mr. Trump's order.

But Mr. Eisen and other ethics experts noted that rules banning lobbyists from taking any job with an agency they had tried to influence in the past two years had been removed. Also, the new rules allow departing executive branch employees to take private sector jobs and then informally lobby the administration, as long as they are not registered as a lobbyist, a type of activity previously prohibited for two years. Registration is required once a person does a certain amount of work for a client.

''There is much to like,'' Mr. Eisen said of the new executive order. ''But it gives nonlobbyists too much leeway when they leave. That is where the biggest problem in the system is: unregistered, shadow lobbyists. They should be getting more regulation, not less.''

He also said, ''Trump kept the Obama limits on the revolving door coming into government, but eliminated Obama's revolving door protections for nonlobbyists leaving government.''

The Islamic State directive calls on Defense Secretary Jim Mattis to devise a more aggressive plan to destroy the group. During the campaign, Mr. Trump widely criticized the handling of the operations by the Obama administration and the military. At one point, he said that he knew ''more about ISIS than the generals do.''

Mr. Trump said during the campaign that he would ask for the 30-day review. He claimed that he had a secret plan to defeat ISIS.

Because Mr. Trump had been explicit about his intention to ask for the review, military planners have been drafting classified options to provide to Mr. Trump.

Among the measures that Mr. Mattis may ultimately recommend are using American artillery on the ground in Syria and using Army attack helicopters to help with the invasion of the group's de facto capital, Raqqa.

Document NYTF000020170129ed1t0008b
