Politics
Three Men Charged With Plotting Attacks in New York City to Support Islamic State; Prosecutors say men planned to bomb Times Square and subway system

By Nicole Hong 
911 words
7 October 2017
01:21
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal authorities on Friday unsealed criminal charges against three men who allegedly plotted bombings and shootings last year in New York City to support the terrorist group Islamic State.

The three defendants are Abdulrahman El Bahnasawy, a 19-year-old Canadian citizen; Talha Haroon, a 19-year-old U.S. citizen living in Pakistan; and Russell Salic, a 37-year-old Philippine citizen.

The Manhattan U.S. attorney's office said the three men plotted to conduct bombings in heavily populated areas of New York City, including in Times Square and the subway system. They also allegedly plotted to shoot civilians at specific concert venues.

The defendants were planning to carry out the attacks during Ramadan, the holiest month in the Islamic calendar, around June through July of 2016, prosecutors said.

Authorities said the Federal Bureau of Investigation and New York Police Department successfully thwarted the plot, largely through the use of an undercover agent who pretended to be a supporter of Islamic State, or ISIS, and to prepare to carry out the attacks with them.

Mr. El Bahnasawy was arrested last year and pleaded guilty to seven charges, including conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction, which carries a maximum penalty of life in prison. Mr. Haroon and Mr. Salic were arrested in Pakistan and the Philippines, respectively, where they are pending extradition, according to the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office.

Lawyers for the three men could not immediately be identified.

Authorities in New York have thwarted several plots against the city in recent years.

John Miller, deputy commissioner of the NYPD's counterterrorism and intelligence unit, said in June that there have been about 25 terrorist plots against New York City since the attacks on Sept. 11, 2001, most of which were thwarted. Common targets included Times Square, the Brooklyn Bridge and John F. Kennedy Airport, he said.

In this case, the undercover agent had been talking to the men since at least late April 2016, according to court documents.

In electronic communications with the agent, Mr. El Bahnasawy and Mr. Haroon allegedly declared their allegiance to ISIS and expressed their desire to carry out terrorist attacks in New York City similar to those in Paris and Brussels.

The attacks in Paris on the night of Nov. 13, 2015, which included gunmen shooting spectators at a popular concert venue, killed 130 people. In the Brussels attack on March 22, 2016, 32 people died after explosions hit the Brussels airport and a subway station.

The defendants identified subway lines where bombs could be detonated. Mr. Haroon allegedly told the undercover agent that they should shoot as many passengers on the subway as possible, including "women or kids."

Prosecutors said Mr. El Bahnasawy sent the agent an image of Times Square, saying, "[W]e seriously need a car bomb at times square...Look at these crowds of people!" He said he aspired to "create the next 9/11."

Mr. Haroon said the plan could include "[d]rive by or we surround the whole street and trap them and kill as many as possible," according to officials. He discussed attempting to execute the attacks as early as Memorial Day weekend.

Mr. Haroon said he was in contact with ISIS associates within a province in Pakistan, where a branch of the terrorist group is active, according to prosecutors. Mr. Haroon allegedly met with an explosives expert in Pakistan and said he would travel to New York City as soon as feasible to carry out the attacks.

Meanwhile, Mr. El Bahnasawy bought bomb-making materials in Canada, including about 40 pounds of hydrogen peroxide, which is commonly used in explosive devices, according to court documents. He sent the materials to the undercover agent in the U.S.

Prosecutors accused Mr. Salic of funding the operation. Mr. Salic allegedly wired around $423 from the Philippines to the undercover agent to help finance the planned attack, and said he was "desperate" to travel to Syria to join ISIS. Mr. Salic suggested that if he couldn't travel to Syria to join ISIS, he might carry out an attack himself, law enforcement said.

Mr. Salic, who identified himself as a doctor, told the agent he was funding the activities of other ISIS supporters in other countries. The criminal complaint said Mr. Salic wired about $426 to an individual in Malaysia who was later arrested and charged with participating in a grenade attack at a Kuala Lumpur nightclub in 2016.

Authorities said Mr. Haroon and Mr. El Bahnasawy planned to build the explosive devices with the undercover agent at a rural cabin within driving distance of New York.

On May 21, 2016, Mr. El Bahnasawy traveled from Canada to the New York City area to carry out the attacks. He was arrested that night in Cranford, N.J., and pleaded guilty a few months later.

Mr. Haroon was arrested around September 2016 in Pakistan, while Mr. Salic was arrested in the Philippines earlier this year.

Write to Nicole Hong at nicole.hong@wsj.com

READ MORE

* New York City Police Department to Create New Counterterrorism Unit (Jan. 29, 2015)

* FBI Says \b ISIS\b0  Used eBay to Send Terror Cash to U.S. (Aug. 10, 2017)

* \b ISIS\b0  Leader Pulls From bin Laden Playbook in New Message (Sept. 29, 2017)

Document WSJO000020171006eda600692
