World; Asia Pacific
Father of Afghan Robotics Team Captain Is Killed in Suicide Bombing

By MUJIB MASHAL and JAWAD SUKHANYAR 
846 words
3 August 2017
10:42
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —hen the Afghan female robotics team, made up of teenage students from the western city of Herat, finally made it to a global competition in the United States, the cameras were focused on them. Here was a glimmer of hope from a place so often associated with bloodshed. The girls had made it against all odds, including being denied  visa s  twice .

With a big smile, Fatemah Qaderyan, 14, the team captain, illustrated just how far girls, even from a challenging place like Afghanistan , could go if given the opportunity. Crucial to that, she repeated, was the support of her parents.

On Tuesday night, Fatemah’ father, Mohammed Asef Qaderyan, 54, was killed  when suicide bombers targeted hundreds of worshipers at a mosque near their home in Herat.

Roya Mahboob , an Afghan technology entrepreneur who helped arrange the team’ trip to the United States, confirmed the news of the death. Jailani Farhad, a spokesman for the governor of Herat, also said that Mr. Qaderyan had been among those killed.

Condolences to Team Afghanistan's captain,Fatemah whose father passed away in recent attack by ISIS in Herat.His daughter made him so proud pic.twitter.com/9StgUjdHPc  —oya Mahboob (@RoyaMahboob) August 3, 2017  (@RoyaMahboob)

The assault, for which the Islamic State claimed responsibility, was the deadliest in a string of attacks this year against Shiite places of worship. It left at least 37 people dead and more than 60 others wounded. The United Nations mission in Afghanistan said this was the fifth attack targeting a Shiite mosque this year, with two of those claimed by the regional branch of the Islamic State.

Most of the dead were buried on Wednesday at Ziarat Sultan Agha cemetery. Rows of graves had been dug in the morning. Thousands of mourners, grieving aloud and chanting prayers, accompanied the coffins of the victims, who ranged from a 3-year-old child who had accompanied his father to prayer, to a man in his 70s.

#AFG  Crowds weep as coffins of dear and near ones being laid to rest and farewelled for the last time. The weight of these coffins pic.twitter.com/WFvAo0mijn  —ILAL SARWARY (@bsarwary) August 2, 2017  —ILAL SARWARY (@bsarwary)

“e never had such a big crowd for funerals —eople came from all ethnic groups and religious sects,”aid Qudos Yassenzada, a local elder who was part of the committee that helped arrange the burials.

The Afghan robotics team attracted international attention after its members’isa requests to attend First Global, a competition with participants from 150 countries, were rejected twice. After a public outcry, President Trump reportedly intervened to let them travel to the United States. Ivanka Trump , the president’ daughter and adviser, met with the team and said it was “ privilege and an honor to have you all with us.”

The team was awarded a silver medal for courageous achievement.

“ am so excited, and very, very happy,”Fatemah said  at the competition, turning the medal over in her hands. “ still can’ believe this happened.”

The girls returned home to a heroes’elcome, with leaders holding receptions for them and awarding them plaques.

“heir success shows that Afghan girls, despite the challenges, can be good inspirations in the field of knowledge and technology,”he president of Afghanistan, Ashraf Ghani , said in congratulating the team.

Ten days later, Fatemah’ father was killed, once again highlighting how short-lived moments of happiness can be amid the increasing violence taking record civilian  lives.

“atemah Qaderyan, who had returned with pride and happiness from America, probably had not had a chance to tell all the stories of her trip and the international reception to her father,”BC Persian wrote.

The attackers, reportedly two of them, entered the mosque as hundreds had gathered for evening prayers. They shot at the worshipers indiscriminately before blowing themselves up. Mr. Qaderyan was shot five times, and his body had also shrapnel wounds, Mr. Yassenzada said.

Upon returning from the United States, Fatemah had expressed concern about the safety of her team, saying the exposure might bring unwanted attention.

“e appeared in front of national and international media, and in our country this is still dangerous that Afghan girls appear before the media,”he told Abdullah Abdullah , the Afghan government’ chief executive. “ur security should be looked after.”

Mr. Yassenzada said the Qaderyan family was poor, largely relying on the income of one of the sons who has a shop in Herat city.

On Thursday, Fatima sat at the women’ funeral hall in Herat city, where people came to pay their respects.

* After Visa Denials, Afghan Girls Can Attend Robotics Contest in U.S. 

* Afghan Girls’obotics Team Wins Limelight at Competition 

Mourners carrying the coffins of victims of an attack on Tuesday on a mosque in Herat, Afghanistan, that killed 37. The Islamic State claimed responsibility. | Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170803ed83002p9
