World News: London Attacker Didn't Hide His Views

By Max Colchester, Georgi Kantchev, Joshua Robinson and Margot Patrick 
697 words
12 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

LONDON -- Khuram Butt, one of the knife-wielding terrorists who killed eight in a rampage last weekend, wasn't a silent plotter blending unseen into immigrant neighborhoods. He was out and about, openly trying to draw others to his radical view.

Near a carpet shop on a side street in east London, the Ummah Fitness Centre bills itself as a spot for Muslims to box and lift weights. Men and women exercise separately, there are prayer breaks, and sayings from the Quran line the walls.

For Butt, the gym was a place to trumpet extremist opinions and, amid the punching bags and barbells, look for like-minded friends.

He would say "very surprising things," said Fahad Khan, a cousin of Butt's wife who uses the gym. He would say "ISIS is doing a very good thing."

The Saturday-night assault and two others in the U.K. in under three months have exposed the difficulty authorities face in keeping tabs on threats.

The attacks also pose a conundrum for governments that honor liberty and free speech: How should they fight on an amorphous battlefield where conservative religious beliefs can shade into fanatical rhetoric and ultimately into terrorism?

Butt made no secret of his ideology. He can be seen in a television documentary, "The Jihadis Next Door," praying with well-known Islamist preachers. He publicly confronted Muslim leaders he considered too moderate. He proselytized in parks.

Some who came into contact with Butt reported him to the police for expressing extremist views or, in one case, for trying to radicalize their child. Others, in a place where conservative religious beliefs are commonplace, shrugged off his words.

Police said Butt was known to them but they had no evidence he was plotting violence.

The three attackers -- Butt, a Pakistan-born British citizen; Youssef Zaghba, a dual Italian-Moroccan national; and Rachid Redouane, a 30-year-old Libyan-Moroccan pastry chef -- spent their final months living humdrum lives within miles of each other in east London.

Zaghba taught gymnastics to children at a sports center. In May, Butt and Redouane attended male-only swimming sessions at a public pool.

Days before the assault, the attackers met outside the Ummah gym. Just after midnight, they embraced each other and parted, camera footage shows.

The working-class areas around Barking and nearby Ilford have been transformed by immigrants. Barking's main street serves African food and has a Romanian convenience store.

"As nice a place as it is here, there are a few people in our community who think extremism is a good idea," said Stephen Timms, a local member of Parliament.

Butt, living a mile away in a tall gray apartment complex, had a young family, attended two mosques sporadically and went by the nickname Abz, short for Abu Zaitun, neighbors say. He had worked briefly for the London Underground.

He would sometimes greet children in the complex when they returned from school. He enjoyed cycling and supported the Arsenal soccer club. He died in the attack, shot by police, wearing an Arsenal shirt.

Away from the neighborhood, Butt fraternized with several people who had formed the Al Muhajiroun group, whose stated aim is to establish a state governed by Shariah law. In 2013 he stood outside Parliament alongside Anjem Choudary, a radical preacher who helped found the group, at a rally showing support for the murder of an off-duty soldier by two Islamic extremists.

Despite his behavior, Butt remained popular with some of the locals. The weekend before his attack, he held a barbecue that was attended by 20 people.

Jean Morrison, a neighbor who was invited, said she didn't see his preaching as unusual. "Others do that too," she said. Last Saturday, a neighbor invited Butt to come over and watch a soccer match on TV. He declined. Just after 9 p.m., a white van screeched away from the apartment complex. An hour later the killing began.

---

Mike Bird, Saabira Chaudhuri and Riva Gold contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170612ed6c0001f

