World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Iraq Faces Balancing Act Between the U.S. and Iran

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
777 words
17 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq -- In the battle against Islamic State, the U.S. and Iran have become de facto allies in Iraq, a convergence of interests that permitted both nations to tacitly cooperate and avoid open conflicts.

Once Islamic State is defeated, however, Washington's and Tehran's interests are likely to diverge, especially if President Donald Trump makes good on his pledge to aggressively contain Iranian power in the region.

To many Iraqis, this poses a challenge: Will their country, just as it emerges from the devastating war against Islamic State, get sucked into in a new round of rivalry between its two most important partners? Such a conflict in Iraq, after all, has the potential to reverberate across the Middle East -- and to set off a new wave of bloodshed.

"Iraq has a divided loyalty -- between the Unites States and Iran -- and it has to find its balance," Hoshyar Zebari, a senior Kurdish politician who served as Iraq's foreign minister for more than a decade, explained the dilemma.

Iran exercises strong influence over Iraq's central government in Baghdad, where key ministries are occupied by pro-Iranian politicians, and even more so over the Shiite armed groups that gained prominence after Islamic State conquered most of the country's Sunni areas in the summer of 2014.

"Iran has 100% control," argued Hamid al Mutlaq, a parliament member from the Sunni province of Anbar. "America gave Iraq to Iran as an easy gift, and of course Iran wants to exploit this situation. If America is honest in correcting its mistakes, there should be a clash between its interests and those of Iran."

Tehran also enjoys considerable sway in the self-ruled Kurdistan region of northern Iraq, particularly in its eastern half. Renewed friction between Washington and Tehran could be just as destabilizing for Kurdistan.

While American influence in Iraq waned after the Obama administration pulled out U.S. forces in 2011, the rapid advances of Islamic State in 2014 forced Washington to play an increasingly critical role in the country.

After the rout of the Iraqi military that year, combined pressure from Washington and Tehran led the Iraqi parliament to oust Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, seen in both capitals as responsible for the debacle, and to replace him with current Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.

Since then, the U.S. sent some 5,000 troops to Iraq and waged an air campaign that helped Iraq regain most of the territories lost in 2014. In recent months, Iraqi troops reclaimed from Islamic State roughly three-quarters of the northern metropolis of Mosul.

"At the moment, the common enemy has made tensions between the U.S. and Iran inapparent," said Dlawer Ala'Aldeen, president of the Middle East Research Institute in Kurdistan's regional capital Erbil. "But they will become more visible after the defeat of ISIS."

Mr. Trump complained in a tweet last month that "Iran is rapidly taking over more and more of Iraq" and, according to a White House readout of his call with Mr. Abadi days later, raised with the Iraqi leader "the threat Iran presents across the entire region." Mr. Trump and Mr. Abadi also reaffirmed the "strong" military partnership between Washington and Baghdad.

Whether U.S. forces remain in Iraq after the fall of Mosul, is likely to emerge as an early political flashpoint -- especially once Iraq gears up for national elections next year.

"Today we have two enemies, the ISIS enemy and the American enemy. If ISIS gets defeated militarily there won't be any justification for the presence of American forces, and we will treat them as invaders, just as we did between 2003 and 2011," said Sheik Abu Talib al Sa'aidi, a senior leader of one of the main pro-Iranian Shiite militias, Kataeb Hezbollah, which fought against U.S. troops before the 2011 pullout.

It's unclear -- and will depend on the broader course of the U.S.-Iranian relationship -- to what extent such fiery rhetoric will reflect Tehran's actual policies.

Hassan Ahmadian, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic Research think tank in Tehran, said that, for now, there is little potential for a clash between the U.S. and Iran over Iraq.

"The main stake for both countries will be stability in Iraq," Mr. Ahmadian said. "The primary goal for Iran is to keep Iraq intact, and I don't think this conflicts with the primary goal of the U.S., which is also stability in Iraq."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170317ed3h00014
