Politics
Senate Democrats' Fundraising Jumps Ahead of 2018 Election; Lawmakers up for re-election rake in three times as much as 6 years ago from energized base; GOP makes gains, too

By Byron Tau and Rebecca Ballhaus 
1,263 words
15 April 2017
00:52
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

                 Corrections & Amplifications                  

WASHINGTON—iding a wave of grass-roots enthusiasm, several Senate Democrats up for re-election in 2018 posted strong fundraising takes in the first quarter, amassing big war chests of campaign cash.             

Democratic candidates in Virginia, Indiana, Missouri and North Dakota reported large fundraising hauls rarely seen so early in an election cycle. Elsewhere, progressive champions such as Sens. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts and Chris Murphy of Connecticut raked in millions of dollars, despite representing heavily Democratic states where they are expected to cruise to an easy re-election.             

The pickup in donations is dramatic. Democratic incumbents in 14 Senate seats that had released their fundraising totals by Friday afternoon had raised more than $30 million in the first quarter of the year, about three times as much as those same candidates raised in the same period six years ago.             

Meanwhile, Republican incumbents in six Senate races that announced their fundraising efforts had raised $6.7 million, almost double what they raised in the same period in 2011. Six years ago, some of those candidates weren't incumbents, who typically have a fundraising advantage. More Senate candidates are expected to report their first-quarter fundraising totals in the coming days.                           

Several Republican Senate candidates, including Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas, also posted impressive quarterly fundraising totals. Moreover, the Republican National Committee, with help from President Donald Trump, said this month that it raised $41.3 million in the first three months of the year—ore than double what its Democratic counterpart raised in the quarter after former President Barack Obama was elected in 2008.             

The Democratic National Committee hadn't released its latest fundraising totals as of Friday afternoon.             

Republicans control 52 out of the 100 Senate seats. Although 34 Senate seats will be up for grabs in November 2018, Democrats and two allied independents are defending 25 of those seats, including several in conservative states where Mr. Trump won by double digits. As a result, any Democratic  path back to a majority in the Senate runs through states like Arizona or Texas—istorically conservative places where Democrats have struggled to win statewide races in recent years.              

The influx of donations into Senate races is another manifestation of the liberal energy sparked by Mr. Trump's surprise election victory in November. Angry Democratic voters have been showing up at congressional town hall meetings, flooding Capitol Hill switchboards and are donating money to Democratic politicians. Online fundraising in particular has exploded, as several campaigns reported record-breaking digital fundraising efforts.                          

"This level of engagement—specially from Missourians who've never contributed to Claire before now—s humbling," said Erika Brees, the finance director for Sen. Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.).             

Ms. McCaskill, who is a top target for Republicans looking to pick up seats, raised about $2.8 million during the first three months of 2017— record in a Missouri Senate race in the first quarter of a nonelection year. Her campaign said more than 5,500 of her contributions in Missouri came from first-time donors.             

In the first three months of 2011, the last cycle in which Ms. McCaskill was up for re-election, she raised about a third that amount: $1 million.             

Other vulnerable Democrats posted similarly large fundraising totals. Sen. Joe Donnelly posted his best fundraising in the first quarter of a nonelection year with his $1.3 million haul.              

Virginia's Sen. Tim Kaine and North Dakota's Sen. Heidi Heitkamp also broke records. Mr. Kaine, who was the Democratic nominee for vice president in 2016, raised about $2.9 million and has $5.5 million in the bank going into his re-election campaign next year. That is the most he has ever raised in a single quarter in a nonelection year.             

Ms. Heitkamp, a top GOP target in 2018, raised more money than any other North Dakota Senate candidate ever has in the first quarter of a nonelection year—1.6 million. She hadn't yet announced her candidacy 18 months out from Election Day last cycle.             

But another Democrat, Sen. Joe Manchin of West Virginia, didn't have the same fundraising windfall as his Senate peers. Mr. Manchin, who represents a state that Mr. Trump won by more than 40 points, announced that he raised about $500,000 for his re-election bid—oughly on par with what he raised at this point in 2011. He has about $2.2 million in the bank. He is considered a top target for Republicans in 2018.              

Republicans, meanwhile, have pointed to the RNC's fundraising success, and note that fundraising emails bearing Mr. Trump's name brought in about 250,000 new online donors to the RNC and Trump re-election campaign, according to a party official. That is a 398% increase over the number of new donors the RNC won in 2016—n election year.             

Of Republican candidates who posted impressive numbers. Mr. Cruz, a former GOP presidential candidate and a candidate who is heavily favored for re-election in a conservative state, raised about $1.7 million. He heads into his re-election bid with $5.2 million in the bank. Mr. Cruz's only declared opponent so far is Beto O'Rourke, a Democratic congressman whose bid is considered a long-shot by many political observers.             

Sen. Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican, raised about $1.3 million—p more than 60% from this quarter in 2011, the year before he was last on the ballot. Mr. Hatch, who is 83 years old and has served in the Senate since 1977, had initially said he would be retiring when his term is up in 2019, but has since indicated that he is likely to pursue an eighth term. He now has $3.5 million in the bank for his campaign. Former Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney has been reportedly exploring a Senate bid in Utah.             

In noncompetitive Democratic states, a number of progressive Democrats have seen an influx in donations. Ms. Warren, a Massachusetts Democrat who is routinely whispered as a potential presidential candidate, reported raising $5.2 million in the first three months of the year. She now has $9.2 million in cash on hand for a Senate race where she is the heavy favorite. And Mr. Murphy, a Connecticut Democrat who has been very critical of Mr. Trump, raised roughly $3 million in the first quarter of the year, and has $3.5 million in the bank.             

The 2017 numbers were provided by the Senate campaigns. Senate fundraising reports aren't officially due until Saturday. Campaign-finance rules don't require Senate candidates to file reports online, meaning there is often a delay in mailing, processing and digitizing their campaign-finance reports filed on paper. As a result, Senate candidates typically self-report their fundraising figures around the time of filing deadlines.             

                 Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com and Rebecca Ballhaus at Rebecca.Ballhaus@wsj.com