The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
'S.N.L' Returns, Ready to Catch Up

By SOPAN DEB 
1,262 words
4 December 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
4
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

There was no shortage of news for ''Saturday Night Live'' to tackle after being off last weekend. It was the show's first episode since the firing of the NBC morning television host Matt Lauer, and it aired one day after President Trump's former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, pleaded guilty to lying to the F.B.I. The writers took aim at both Mr. Flynn and Mr. Lauer right at the top.

The cold open began where many ''S.N.L.'' episodes do: in the Oval Office, with Alec Baldwin playing a scowling Mr. Trump. This time, the sketch was a parody of ''A Christmas Carol.'' Mikey Day appeared in chains as Mr. Flynn and identified himself as the ''Ghost of Witness Flipped,'' and he warned Mr. Trump to come clean ''for the good of the country.''

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

''Before all this, I had a great life, Donald,'' Mr. Day said. ''I was an honorable, twice-fired military man who loved to talk about how Hillary Clinton had a child sex ring in a pizza shop.''

Mr. Day then warned Mr. Baldwin that ghosts of Mr. Trump's past would be visiting him that same night. The first one was the former ''Today'' show host Billy Bush, played by Alex Moffat. Mr. Bush, who appeared on the ''Access Hollywood'' tape that emerged near the end of the presidential campaign, was suspended by NBC and ultimately left the network.

''Frankly, I'm looking pretty good in the NBC News division right about now,'' Mr. Moffat said, in the night's first reference to Mr. Lauer. ''Remember, Donald, these things catch up with all of us. If you worked at NBC right now you would be fired, fired, fired. And out of money.''

''S.N.L.'' has recently found itself in the uncomfortable position of criticizing names close to the show. Aside from being one of NBC's biggest stars, Mr. Lauer has only slight ties to ''S.N.L.'' compared with recent targets like the comedian Louis C.K. and Senator Al Franken of Minnesota. After Mr. Moffat departed, Beck Bennett resurrected his impersonation of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, followed by another ghost of Mr. Trump's past: Hillary Clinton, played once again by Kate McKinnon, and wearing a black robe.

''You, Donald, have given me the greatest gift of all: sexual gratification in the form of your slow demise,'' Ms. McKinnon said.

The other digs at Mr. Lauer came later during the ''Weekend Update'' segment.

''I almost forgot about this week's batch of predators,'' said the co-host Colin Jost, with a picture behind him of Mr. Lauer, the hip-hop mogul Russell Simmons and the radio personality Garrison Keillor. ''It's just a whole new segment of the news now. You've just got to read the names every week like Powerball numbers.''

Mr. Jost followed up: ''On Wednesday, the Rockefeller Center Christmas tree was lit, and so was Ann Curry,'' a reference to Ms. Curry's much-publicized exit from the ''Today'' show in 2012.

Brutal Song of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

A digital short titled ''Welcome to Hell,'' featuring this week's host, Saoirse Ronan, as well as Aidy Bryant, Cecily Strong, Kate McKinnon and other female members of the cast, was a searing sendup of the public shock at the flood of powerful men recently accused of sexual misconduct.

''All these big, cool, powerful guys are turning out to be -- what's the word? Habitual predators?'' Ms. Bryant said, with lollipops, rainbows and clouds in the background.

''Now 'House of Cards' is ruined,'' sang Ms. Ronan. ''And that really sucks. Well, here's a list of stuff that's ruined for us.''

''Parking and walking and Uber and ponytails. Bathrobes and nighttime and drinking and hotels and vans!''

''S.N.L.'' has struggled to find the proper tone to address the spate of sexual misconduct allegations that have dominated the news cycle. Some of this has been because of timing. When the Harvey Weinstein allegations initially broke, it was late in the week and the show shelved a sketch before airtime. A week later, the show aired an uncomfortable sketch riffing off a panel of actresses at the New York Film Festival discussing Mr. Weinstein. During an episode in early November, Alec Baldwin, in the headlines himself for making awkward comments about sexual harassment, cracked jokes as President Trump about Mr. Weinstein.

Charming Song of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Try to keep the song by Ms. Ronan out of your head. The New York-born actress's game attempt to teach the American public how to pronounce her Irish name was catchy, amusing and actually useful. Previously, Ms. Ronan has worn a sign on ''The Ellen Show'' that bore a handy guide: ''Hello. My name is Sur-sha.''

'Weekend Update' Takes On the Tax Bill

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Jost and Michael Che spent a large portion of ''Weekend Update'' bashing Senate Republicans for their sweeping tax overhaul and also targeting Mr. Flynn.

Here are some of the quips:

''Well, the good news for President Trump is that his tax plan just passed the Senate. The bad news is he might not be president long enough to sign it,'' Mr. Jost said. After summarizing Mr. Flynn's guilty plea, he mocked Fox News's coverage: ''Or as Fox News reported it, did Hillary Clinton secretly join ISIS?''

On the tax bill, Mr. Jost said, ''Wow, I knew Trump was going to run the country like a business. I just didn't know he was going to run it like one of his businesses.''

Mr. Che went on this riff:

You know, once the Republicans get this tax bill passed, they won't need Donald Trump anymore. I mean, they already got what they wanted. You know, I mean, it's like -- it's not like they like you.

Don't you think it's a little odd that they passed this bill at 2 a.m. without reading it the same night they found out Flynn was snitching on you? They know something. It's like your family showing up to your hospital room saying, ''Look, you need to sign this will tonight.'' ''Can I read it first?'' ''No time.''

Sketch of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

This week's sketch about a man who is discovered to have a suspicious affection for American Girl dolls in the aftermath of a gas line explosion was fairly brilliant. The way Mr. Day's character starts hesitant and evasive before finding himself unable to refrain from expressing his obsession with his doll is a deft arc. The laserlike focus on Mr. Day's peculiar fascination by all the sketch's characters -- even in the midst of the explosion's debris -- was a neat bit of commitment from the writers.

Deskside Bit of the Week

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Kate McKinnon playing Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain was, unsurprisingly, amusing. Ms. McKinnon aimed to portray Ms. May as a stiff world leader now willing to engage in ''social media fisticuffs'' with Mr. Trump. The escalation from ''Mr. Kim Jong-un. Good sir. Do grow up. #Please,'' to telling Prince Harry, ''You look like Ed Sheeran minus the abilities,'' was a bizarre and worthwhile journey.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Document NYTF000020171204edc40005t
