Best of Late Night
Arts; Television
Trevor Noah Says  ISIS  Could Trick Deniers Into Acknowledging Climate Change

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
687 words
7 September 2017
10:47
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

Challenging the Deniers

By now, Trevor Noah said, it seems obvious that climate change is causing the catastrophic hurricanes that continue to sweep across the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean. Fed up with those who deny artificial climate change, he hatched a plan to change their minds.

“aybe ISIS should start taking credit for hurricanes. Every time a hurricane hits, ISIS should be like, ‘hat was us. We sent that storm to destroy America.’nd then Republicans will be like, ‘hat’ ridiculous. You guys can’ cause hurricanes!’nd they’l be like, ‘ell, then who causes the hurricanes?’hen they’l be like, ‘hey’e caused by climate change! Oh, man, nicely played.’”—REVOR NOAH

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Meanwhile, Seth Meyers and James Corden didn’ find President Trump’ tweet about Hurricane Irma very comforting.

“ey, man, could you try not to sound so excited? It’ a hurricane, not the ‘ame of Thrones’inale.”—ETH MEYERS

“ow insecure is this guy that he even has to brag that his hurricanes are bigger than Obama’? I mean, I understand it in a way. In Trump’ defense, it’ rare that he sees a natural disaster bigger than his administration.”—AMES CORDEN

‘hat Happened’

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Hillary Clinton takes swipes at Senator Bernie Sanders, her rival for the Democratic presidential nomination in 2016, in her new book, “hat Happened.”r. Meyers returned those jabs in a segment called “ey!”

“his isn’ the time to complain because Senator Woodstock didn’ roll over for you. Hey, if anything, he helped make you a better candidate —ou know, the candidate who beat Donald Trump by three million votes.”—ETH MEYERS

Jimmy Kimmel might not be the first in line at Mrs. Clinton’ book signing.

“Hillary Clinton has her name on a new book about her ill-fated run for the presidency —hich I am excited about. I was just thinking to myself this morning: ‘ would love to relive that magical election of 2016.’t’ like reading a book about why the Titanic sank while you’e sitting at the bottom of the ocean.”—IMMY KIMMEL

The Punchiest Punchlines (Sushi Burrito Edition)

“Starbucks has started selling a new sushi burrito. When asked how much it costs, Starbucks said, ‘on’ worry, you’l pay for it later.’”—IMMY FALLON

“linton referred to James Comey as a ‘ash F.B.I. director.’o she and Trump have that in common. Although, in fairness to Comey, he only got that rash after being forced to shake hands with her husband.”—IMMY KIMMEL, on Mrs. Clinton’ book “hat Happened”

The Bits Worth Watching

How many members of Congress can you name? If it’ zero, you could still get half a cookie.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Boy bands or solo artists? The kind of question that keeps Mr. Corden up at night.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

What We’e Excited About on Thursday Night

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

When it comes to Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Sanders, Stephen Colbert is more sympathetic to Mrs. Clinton than Mr. Meyers is. Mr. Colbert made that much clear on Wednesday’ “ate Show,”hen he endorsed Mrs. Clinton’ suggestion that Mr. Sanders’ campaign irresponsibly promised too much help to Americans. Still, Mr. Sanders will be on “he Late Show”n Thursday for an interview.

Also, Check This Out

Elizabeth McGovern, of “ownton Abbey”ame, is playing an Edwardian matriarch once again —ut this time, she’ on Broadway. Here’ our interview with Ms. McGovern.

Trevor Noah said he had a plan for changing the minds of Republicans who deny artificial climate change. | Comedy Central | Elizabeth McGovern of “ownton Abbey.” Aaron Richter for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170907ed97002p9
