Arts; Art & Design
Fixing the Met: Art Lovers Speak

By JASON FARAGO and SOPHIE HAIGNEY 
3,634 words
14 July 2017
19:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

HELP WANTED: Stately home seeks caretaker for priceless collection of antiquities, pictures, bronzes and bric-a-brac. Successful applicant will oversee staff of 2,500, ensure upkeep, supervise purchases and promote estate’ interests at home and abroad. Manor is leaky —lanned extension delayed (owners have second home nearby). Send réumé to 1000 Fifth Avenue, Manhattan. (Those with dust allergies need not apply.)

O.K., finding a new director for the Metropolitan Museum of Art will take more than a LinkedIn posting —ut the hunt is on for a successor to Thomas P. Campbell, whose resignation last winter added a kink to the Met’ tangle of troubles. Attendance, at seven million, is at a high. Exhibitions are some of the finest anywhere. Yet as it approaches its 150th birthday, the museum lumbers under a nearly $15 million deficit; a planned new wing for modern and contemporary art has been deferred; and the Met’ optional admissions charge may be replaced with a mandatory entrance fee for out-of-towners.

A new director, expected to be named later this year, will have to plot a new path forward. But it’ still the grandest job in the art world —ven though some aspects of that job must now be shared with Daniel H. Weiss, its president, who was garlanded last month with the additional title of chief executive. (Mr. Campbell held that title previously, and at most museums the artistic head occupies the top post.) With the new director reporting to Mr. Weiss, and not the other way around, many aspects of the job-share still have to be worked out.

The Met’ lease on the Breuer runs out in 2023. Assuming the Whitney Museum of American Art doesn’ take it back, should the Met extend its lease? How can older and newer art speak to each other at the Breuer and on Fifth Avenue (and even at the Cloisters, the third location)? Can we get better food than the public cafeteria, and can we have our metal admissions badges back? Can the Met keep up its crucial, but budget-straining, efforts to digitize its collections? How should it draw a younger, more diverse audience?

The 10th man —r first woman —o serve as Met director thus already has a full inbox. But here, a range of Met-ophiles —rtists and archaeologists, chefs and curators, designers and D.J.s, playwrights and performers —ffer their own ideas and expectations for how a new director can rethink the world’ greatest museum for a new century. Some of these suggestions are bold, others more whimsical, but all of them come from people who want nothing more than to see the museum on solid ground.

These are edited excerpts from recent conversations.  Share your own tips for the Met’ new director on Facebook  .

______

Paul D. Miller (a.k.a. DJ Spooky)

Experimental and electronic artist; hip-hop musician

The average person looks at a painting for six seconds. Technology might be a good way to hold people’ attention for longer. I remember when Pokéon Go got wildly popular and everyone was running around looking for various characters, and you had all these kids gathering around these virtual watering holes. They weren’ there for six seconds; they were there for minutes. So I think museums could use augmented reality to keep people looking. You can hold your phone up to a painting and get information about it. You could have artists narrate their own work. You could have Waze bring you through the museum, or even the voice of Elvis, if you synthesized it. The Met is a perfect petri dish for a whole kaleidoscope of experiences to create more immersion in the museum. It’ important that they change and update their app constantly. I like to say we live in the world of unfinished work.

(DJ Spooky was a  resident artist  at the Met in 2012.)

______

Glenn Ligon

Visual Artist

I was at a talk where a prominent museum director was asked by a colleague, What was the most important lesson he had learned while on the job? His response was “ learned to listen to artists.”

One thing the new director needs to do is make the galleries in the Met places where artists actually want to show their work. They need to make proper galleries to show their contemporary collection. And if they don’ change the galleries right away, they need to at least rotate the collection once in a while so it doesn’ feel like it is a storage area that someone left the door open to.

(Mr. Ligon is in the Met’ collection.)

______

Takashi Murakami

Visual Artist

At the Met, the collection is just so rare. Kano Sansetsu’ screen “ld Plum”[from the Edo period, 1646] has been in the center of my heart always. I used to go see it many times when I first started living in New York —nd of course the other works surrounding it. I don’ know about the turmoil, but the Met is going to be O.K. because of the potential of the collection.

______

Ayad Akhtar

Playwright, “isgraced”Pulitzer Prize, 2013)

I remember when MoMA raised the ticket price to $20. And I heard that oddly enough, counterintuitively, admissions went up —ut I wasn’ making enough money to justify spending $20 a ticket. Because of that, I ended up going to the Met more.

______

Simon Doonan

Fashion commentator

If the Met could extend into Central Park with an outdoor sculpture garden, it could truly become a destination. There are a couple that come to mind, like the Hakone Open-Air Museum and sculpture park in Japan, or Storm King Art Center upstate. From an engagement perspective, it would be an incredible Instagram opportunity. Oh, there would also have to be a cafe. A kind of groovy al fresco eatery.

(Mr. Doonan designed displays for the Met’ “ostumes of Royal India”how.)

______

Nico Muhly

Composer

I feel like the Met has been killing it recently —“Sara Berman’ Closet” [by the artists Maira and Alex Kalman recreating the modest closet of Ms. Kalman’ mother] being an especially poignant example of using that space in a poetic and surprising way. The one thing underexplored is the Met as a space for site-specific theater. I remember as a boy watching the “esame Street”ovie “Don’ Eat the Pictures,”hich takes place at the Met —bsolutely terrifying stuff; an Egyptian boy comes back from beyond the grave and asks Big Bird to help him get his heart weighed to see if he can go to the cosmic afterlife. What you want is to hire Robert Wilson to do a live version of this in the Temple of Dendur. Can you imagine how beautiful it would be —ig Bird moving really slowly, and a small child and a heart projected on the floor and the stars visible through the roof? I would go to that.

______

Montana Simone

Owner,  Idio Gallery  , Bushwick, Brooklyn

I was thinking about my last visit to the Met, showing it off to my parents who haven’ been in town in years. I truly felt like a part of it, and then I walked outside, and my mom’, like, the David Koch Plaza? What? And it underscores something that a lot of us accept about New York —he repercussions of conservative old money underwriting culture in the city. In some ways that’ been important, but it’ also continued the direction that a lot of the politics of the country have continued downward. I would urge a new leader of the Met, even if they are not the C.E.O. and if they can’ rename the plaza, to at least show some kind of self-awareness and transparency as a public institution and hold educational programming about sustainability that will have as much of an impact as putting a climate-denier’ name on a plaza.

______

Bill Telepan

Restaurateur, chef

They have a restaurant in the Met? I would never think to go there to eat. I would say to a friend, let’ go through MoMA, and pop down to Bar Room [at the Modern restaurant] for a drink and a snack. You go to the Whitney, and after that you’l pop into Untitled. The Met Breuer has Flora, the guys from the Estela [restaurant]. So my first suggestion is: Get a good food program there, whether it’ a fancy, high-end place or not. You have this beautiful rooftop, and you could have a food element there. If you’e going to build a new wing, make sure half of it’ a restaurant by a really good restaurateur. I mean, I’l do it if they want me to.

Another idea: They should have coffee stands throughout with chairs and the tiniest little tables, and a guy with an espresso machine just hanging out. Places where you could actually sit among the El Greco paintings with a little coffee. It would keep you there. It’ be awesome.

______

Zainab Bahrani

Professor, ancient Near Eastern art and archaeology, Columbia University

One of the things that I’e dreamed about —hough maybe it’ just a pipe dream —s for the Met to create a sister relationship with museums in Iraq and, ultimately, Syria that need to be renovated and restarted. For instance, the Mosul Museum [in Iraq, looted and smashed by the Islamic State] has just been liberated from the ISIS occupation. Wouldn’ it be wonderful if they could partner with American colleagues, even over Skype? That’ one way the Met can contribute its professionalism and expertise to preserving that cultural heritage. And the Met’ own galleries for ancient Near Eastern art could use some spiffing up. Highlighting these galleries with a new installation would bring more attention to the incredibly rich art and architectural traditions of this region. This is more important than ever now, since so much is being deliberately destroyed.

(Dr. Bahrani was a curator in the department of ancient Near Eastern art at the Met in the early 1990s and has organized workshops with the Met in Istanbul and Amman.)

______

Mark Bradford

Artist

I hope the new director will be asking museumgoers, How can we serve you better? Today we have the possibility to reanimate what a museum can look like and expand the idea. A director should have the flexibility to be not just a fund-raiser but to get out, listen, be part of the community. Take a risk, maybe bring a Planned Parenthood office onto your campus. Art history is about context; it’ about the sociopolitical environment that produces art. What environment are we building now, and what will it produce? The museum could be finding creative ways to implement this sustained dialogue.

(Mr. Bradford is in the Met’ collection.)

______

Sharon Zukin

Author and sociology professor, City University of New York

The Metropolitan Museum is a national treasure, but it’ dependent on the city government and on donations to function, so maybe it’ time to rethink the way an encyclopedic museum works. They have so much work that they can’ show it, and then they try to expand the physical plant. Whatever they do requires them to raise enormous amounts of capital and justify that by getting more visitors. This grow-or-die commandment poses enormous difficulties and burdens on museums and the people who love them. One wild suggestion would be to become more decentralized, like libraries: Break down the Metropolitan Museum experience, officially, and make different hives within the museum, and charge lower admission fees to go into one specific section or another. Another possibility is to send things out of the museum on long-term loans as free installations to democratize access further. That would sure beautify the public schools.

______

Cheech Marin

Comedian, actor, founder, Cheech Marin Center for Chicano Art, Culture and Industry

Show more Chicano art! I have always said you can’ love or hate Chicano art unless you’e seen it. This is a valuable and important school of art that’ being ignored and needs shelf space.

______

Benjamin Millepied

Choreographer; artistic director, L.A. Dance Project

The Met should be open until midnight twice a week. There should be ambitious site-specific performances, which are broadcast live, and well-programmed concerts. Imagine live music and dance performances in unexpected programs on late nights. The right programming could attract a younger audience and turn the Met into the place to be. The museum also needs two terrific restaurants. There is so much to appreciate in that setting, and no place to dine.

______

Michael Bierut

Graphic designer

One of the biggest challenges they have is this simple thing called way-finding. You go up those stairs, which is an iconic New York experience, and then you go into grand hall, and it’ like waking up with amnesia in the world’ busiest train station. You forget where you are, and no one’ helping you figure out where you need to go. The museum should reward serendipity to a certain degree, and making unexpected discoveries on the way to whatever you think you were looking for. But people need more help. Curators under the leadership of the new director can figure out how to complement the collection with old-fashioned hand-held paper maps, signs people look for as a matter of course, and new technology like apps and GPS. Now it’ like doing Sudoku in some Martian-based 39-number [counting] system. It just doesn’ seem solvable.

______

David Rockwell

Architect and Tony-winning scenic designer; co-author, “pectacle.”

I think about what a kind of formidable structure the building is for kids —nd I take my kids there a lot. It’ interesting to imagine, from a family point of view, about the experience of entering the Met and how to make it more permeable, starting with those incredible steps at the front of the building. It’ one of the great places to hang out —he üer-doorstep. Performances at the base of those entry steps could be formalized, something where artists are invited. There are great architectural spaces that aren’ currently used for exhibits proper and could be used as public space in a welcoming way. It’ interesting to think about how to link the backside of the museum to Central Park that might particularly address kids and families — secret garden or art path.

______

Victoria Newhouse

Museums expert; author, “haos and Culture”2017)

For me, the Metropolitan Museum is the Louvre of the United States, and frankly I would not reimagine it. I think the Met is exactly right in terms of the curators and programmers it has. But I do think there are changes that could be made. The full board of trustees is way too big. I understand that it’ near to 100 people, and I think that makes it very difficult to manage and get meaningful input. I’e been told by people working at the museum that there are a number of people on the board who contribute very little except money. There should be some people on that board who take their participation very seriously on issues at the museum.

In terms of the direction being divided between two people, my art friends all say, Who in heaven’ name is going to want that second job if they’e answering to someone else, and if every time they come up with an idea, the money guy is going to say, Oh no, bottom line? This structure has been tried a number of times. It was tried at the Met with Bill [William H.] Luers and Philippe de Montebello. It was tried in Philadelphia, too, when Anne d’arnoncourt shared responsibility with Robert Scott. In both of those cases, it was a very problematic decision.

(Ms. Newhouse was a consultant for the architect search committee for the new modern and contemporary wing in 2016.)

______

Siri Hustvedt

Novelist, author of “ A Woman Looking at Men Looking at Women: Essays on Art, Sex, and the Mind  ”2016)

Because about 70 percent of curators in the U.S., perhaps even in the world, are women, there’ something bizarre about the fact that the Met has never had a woman director. Appointing a woman would be important from a symbolic perspective, but it’ also important that they pick a woman who thinks deeply about the museum and its role in the culture. A person who simply bemoans the numbers and the fact that change isn’ occurring quickly enough is not the answer. The question is why art by women continues to be “omen’ art,”ot just “rt.”

I’e seen Met advertisements that say, “come celebrate Women’ History Month at the Met,”nd, frankly, that strikes me as a touch condescending. The powers that be don’ really know how to address this issue. Self-interrogation would be a good place to start. The Met should have a mission statement, a full-throated and wholehearted recognition that part of the history of museums has been marginalization of women and many other people. It should be deeply a part of the museum’ mission. Though the Met has been making something of an effort —he Vigé Le Brun exhibition was great —he representation of women in their collections is pretty feeble. Since the Guerrilla Girls, we still don’ feel that the behemoth has dramatically changed.

______

Julie Gaines

Owner,  Fishs Eddy 

I have this discussion with my son, who’ a painter, all the time: What’ wrong with the Met? Several years ago, there was an exhibit at MoMA that paired older artists and newer ones. It put together Céanne’ “he Bather”ith this contemporary photograph of a teenager at the beach by Rineke Dijkstra, who I’ never even heard of before that show, and it made me think completely differently about “he Bather.”ducating people that way is more inventive than just lectures. They could do more of taking pieces that are already in the Met —ike African masks —nd pairing them with other pieces in the permanent collection. People who want more information will get the audio recordings, but there’ also a way to teach through art. We look at it through our own lenses.

It would also be great if there were some rooms that had fewer paintings. Psychologically it would make you look at art differently. Right now, the pieces are all placed more or less at the same height, and the same distance apart. It’ monotonous. Maybe if they could kind of change the permanent collection up and give more importance to a Courbet, or some other small painting, it would allow you to sit and look at it. You’e talking to someone who moves their art up and down as a hobby. I nail and then unnail things all the time. In my next life, I’ going to be a curator.

______

Judith Bernstein

Visual Artist

They should make a conscious effort to feature more art by women and to take more chances. They shouldn’ wait until someone has been around for 20 years. I have a vested interest in work that’ sexual, and political. The Met should have a show called “he History of Political Art.”hey could start with Goya and then move on to Kähe Kollwitz [1867–945], and political art that deals with the Vietnam War —nd art that deals with AIDS. They could put the sexual political stuff, the feminists and L.G.B.T.Q. artists, on display. Donald Trump is on everyone’ mind, and it’ important to address this issue at this moment.

______

Hank Willis Thomas

Artist and a founder of For Freedoms, an artist-run ‘uper PAC’

The Met and the American Museum of Natural History really set the tone for how visitors understand history and culture. The organization of a museum helps create those narratives. At the Met, if you walk in and go to the left, you have Greece and Rome and beyond that, Africa. And to the right, you have Egypt. And the question for me is, Where is Egypt? Oh yeah, I think Egypt’ in Africa. If the Met’ trying to be objective, objectively Egypt should be closer to Africa.

A lot of students learn about history through art, and the narrative of anything related to Africa and Polynesia and indigenous America is still laden with this notion of primitivism. And if I’ a kid in the Met, I wouldn’ really see an acknowledgment that Egypt, one of the foundations of civilization and of modern intellectual life, was part of Africa and that Egyptians had a range of skin tones, but they definitely didn’ look like Elizabeth Taylor. The excision of Egypt from Africa has been so successful —as there ever been a movie made with Africans playing Egyptians? The responsibility of museums is to correct those narratives and explain: What did those people really look like? What was their art like?

(Mr. Thomas has organized public programs with the education department at the Met.)

Share your tips for the Met’ new director on Facebook.

______

Additional interviews by Robin Pogrebin, Hilarie M. Sheets, Roslyn Sulcas, Michael Walker. Edited by Barbara Graustark. Animations by Fraser Croall.

Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson | Adam Simpson 

Document NYTFEED020170714ed7e0076d
