Best of Late Night
Arts
A Working Holiday for Colbert and Meyers

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
533 words
21 February 2017
11:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy .

What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

Colbert and Meyers Take On Trump’ Media Attacks

Most late-night hosts took Presidents’ay off. But Stephen Colbert and Seth Meyers observed the holiday by taking some shots at President Trump —articularly his suggestion that the news media is an enemy of the American people.

The FAKE NEWS media (failing @nytimes, @NBCNews, @ABC, @CBS, @CNN) is not my enemy, it is the enemy of the American People! —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) February 17, 2017

“ou know who I feel bad for? ISIS. They try so hard. Sorry, ISIS, if you want to get on the list, publish photos of Trump’ inauguration crowd. Then he’l be really angry at you.”—OLBERT

“ swear to do everything in my power to protect the nation from America’ enemies —hich I’ being told are CBS and the failing New York Times. Wow, things have really changed since I was in the Army five minutes ago.”—OLBERT, impersonating H. R. McMaster, the recently appointed national security adviser

“enator John McCaincriticized President Trump’ attack on the media yesterday and said that stifling the press is how dictators get started. Said Trump: ‘ool, and then what do they do next?’holds up imaginary notepad]”—EYERS

[Video: “ven just getting into an airplane now is a suspenseful experience under Trump,”r. Meyers said of reports that the president did not consult his secretary of state on his decision to back off the two-state solution. Watch on YouTube.]

The Meatloaf Diet

Mr. Meyers also couldn’ help feasting on the news that Mr. Trump had insisted that Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, a former surrogate of the Trump campaign, order the meatloaf when they recently dined together.

“f course, the meatloaf was actually a second course for Christie after Trump made him swallow his pride.”—EYERS

A Bit Worth Watching

[Video: Stephen Colbert paying tribute to Mr. Trump’ erroneous claim of a terrorist attack in Sweden. Watch on YouTube.]

What We’e Excited About on Tuesday Night

Joe Scarborough, the MSNBC host and former congressman, will appear on “he Late Show,”osted by Mr. Colbert. The two have spent the past month criticizing Mr. Trump, in very different ways. It would be a surprise if the president’ attacks on the news media didn’ figure heavily into the discussion.

[Video: The host Joe Scarborough describing Mr. Trump’ assessment of the news media as “ery, very dangerous”n “orning Joe.”Watch on YouTube.]

* Jimmy Fallon (as Trump) Meets the Press

* Stephen Colbert Accuses Trump in a ‘sual Suspects’arody

* Pence and Trump Bear Brunt of Late-Night Jokes about Michael Flynn

* Stephen Miller, Trump’ Defender in Chief, Is Late Night’ New Nemesis

Seth Meyers taking on President Trump’ claim that the news media is an “nemy”f the American people. | NBC 

Document NYTFEED020170221ed2l001jl
