World; Asia Pacific
Philippine City Is Declared ‘iberated’rom Terrorists After Months of Fighting

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
728 words
17 October 2017
13:24
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —lanked by soldiers and officers, President Rodrigo Duterte of the Philippines on Tuesday declared the southern city of Marawi “iberated from terrorist influence,”ive months after Islamic militants stormed the town, killing scores and sending thousands fleeing.

The president’ visit to Marawi came one day after the authorities declared government forces had killed the insurgency’ leaders in a gunfight. But gunfire could still be heard in pockets of the city, where about 30 militants, some of them foreigners, continued a last stand. At least 20 civilians remain hostages, the authorities said.

Those remaining fighters, officials said, were led by Mahmud bin Ahmad, a Malaysian terrorist who has helped fund the fighting in the Philippines’estive south. Mr. Ahmad was a close associate of Isnilon Hapilon, an F.B.I.-wanted terrorist who was killed in Monday’ fighting. Mr. Hapilon was the leader of Abu Sayyaf, a terrorist group linked to the Islamic State.

The area still controlled by Mr. Mahmud and his fighters is “ery much contained and controlled,”aid Maj. Gen. Restituto Padilla, a military spokesman.

General Padilla described Mr. Mahmud as an “cademic,”ho lacked the leadership skills of Mr. Hapilon and Omarkhayam Maute, another experienced guerrilla who was also killed on Monday.

“is ability to lead the fight is not there,”eneral Padilla said of Mr. Mahmud.

Mr. Mahmud, 39, trained at Al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan in the 1990s while studying at Islamabad Islamic University in Pakistan. He is a former lecturer of Islamic studies at the University of Malaya in Kuala Lumpur, one of Malaysia’ top universities.

Now that the bulk of the fighting has ended, the government must begin the difficult work of rebuilding the badly battered city.

More than 200,000 residents are crammed in filthy refugee camps, waiting for the military to declare the operation officially ended.

“lease be patient,”ol. Romeo Brawner, a regional army spokesman, told the displaced residents. “e will have to clear the area before you are allowed to return.”

Colonel Brawner said soldiers must “escue the remaining hostages and make sure there are no stragglers or I.E.D.s of unexploded ordnance left behind.”

Mr. Duterte declared martial law in Mindanao Province in May when fighting broke out. Two months later, he extended the provision through the end of this year.

General Padilla said on Tuesday that martial law would remain in place despite the cessation in fighting.

“here is a greater threat here that needs to be addressed,”e said. “he need for the maintenance of martial law in some parts is really important because of the network, the existence of the network of all these terrorist groups.”

Julkipli Wadi, a professor of Islamic studies at the University of the Philippines, said that although the fighting in Marawi may be close to ending, there has been a noticeable increase in violence elsewhere in the south.

The battle for Marawi showed Islamic State-affiliated fighters that a small group of militants can hold their own against the Philippine Army for months, Professor Wadi said.

“hey pinned down the army for five months,”e said. “his is a group that was not even recognized, let alone accorded respectability, some two years ago.”

“he picture down the stretch is not pretty,”rofessor Wadi warned. “s yesterday’ rain enlivens a dry brook, tomorrow’ rain will facilitate even more its turning into a gushing, dangerous river.”

* Philippines Says It Killed \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Leader in Push to Reclaim City

* Captive Priest Is Freed as Philippine Troops Close In on Militants

* He Aimed to Fight in Syria. \b ISIS\b0  Had a Broader Plan: Southeast Asia

* In City of Ruins, Philippines’attle Against \b ISIS\b0  Rages On

* Philippine Supreme Court Upholds Duterte’ Martial Law Edict

A Philippine soldier in Marawi last month. After months of fighting, President Rodrigo Duterte declared the city liberated on Tuesday. | Jes Aznar for The New York Times | Mr. Duterte, center, addressed Philippine troops on Tuesday. His visit came one day after officials said that government forces had killed the insurgency’ leaders in a gunfight. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press | Soldiers listening to Mr. Duterte’ speech in front of posters showing images of two Islamist leaders killed on Monday. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171017edah002gx
