U.S.; Politics
Trump’ Plan to Fight  ISIS  Includes Calling It a New Name

By MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT 
609 words
29 January 2017
07:14
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —Donald J. Trump said during the campaign that he had a secret plan for the fight against the Islamic State. Eight days into his presidency, he seems to have revealed a small part of it.

ISIL is out. ISIS is in.

An executive memorandum that Mr. Trump signed on Saturday afternoon in the Oval Office repeatedly referred to the Islamic State as ISIS —ot ISIL, as President Barack Obama and the rest of the federal government had called the terrorist group since 2014.

“his is the plan to defeat the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, in other words, ISIS,”r. Trump said as he signed the memorandum, which called on the Pentagon to devise a “omprehensive plan”ithin 30 days.

The White House also used the name ISIS in summaries of the calls Mr. Trump had on Saturday with the Russian and French presidents.

As the terrorist group rose to prominence during Mr. Obama’ second term, American intelligence agencies began referring to it as ISIL —or the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, a translation from Arabic —nd Mr. Obama began using the term.

Like Mr. Obama, most senior officials pronounced it Eye-sul. Some just said the letters. And occasionally, a government official would refer to it as Iss-ull.

The Levant denotes an area larger than Syria, including Lebanon, Jordan and Israel. Although the news media has widely used the term ISIS —ith its sinister sibilance —he federal government stayed with ISIL.

Conspiracy theories have been floated in the conservative media about why Mr. Obama used the term. Rush Limbaugh said in 2015 that Mr. Obama had employed the acronym as a way of delegitimizing Israel.

“h, and, by the way, just to reiterate something: ISIS versus ISIL,”e said. “he Levant includes Israel, includes much of the eastern Mediterranean shoreline. By using the term ISIL, it is meant to delegitimize Israel. It is meant to include Israel in the Levant, which would make it Palestine. I’ telling you, there’ a reason Obama does this, and his audience is not us.”

A day before Mr. Limbaugh’ comments, Mr. Trump complained about Mr. Obama’ use of ISIL as he attacked Mr. Obama’ efforts to defeat the group. As Mr. Trump offered a running commentary on Twitter of Mr. Obama’ address after the attacks in San Bernardino, Calif., Mr. Trump harped on Mr. Obama’ use of the term.

Wish Obama would say ISIS, like almost everyone else, rather than ISIL. —Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) December 7, 2015

As recently as last May, Mr. Trump again brought up the issue, saying in an interview with Bloomberg Politics: “he president of the United States always says ‘SIL.’veryone else says ‘ISIS.’nd I actually think he does it to bother people.”

Mr. Trump’ Pentagon and State Department apparently have not gotten the memo that there is a new acronym in town.

In a statement released on Friday by the State Department that included a travel warning about Libya, the department said that “SIL claimed responsibility for two vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices in Tripoli in September 2016.”

And in a statement released on Thursday by the Pentagon spokesman, Capt. Jeff Davis, that summarized a call between Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the French defense minister, Jean-Yves Le Drian, Captain Davis said that “he secretary discussed the importance of the NATO alliance and counter-ISIL operations, and thanked Minister Le Drian for his country’ continued commitment to both.”

Document NYTFEED020170129ed1t000um
