Kushner In Iraq For  ISIS  Briefing

By Gordon Lubold 
697 words
4 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- President Donald Trump's senior adviser and son-in-law Jared Kushner arrived in Baghdad on Monday on a surprise visit to meet U.S. and Iraqi officials and to receive military briefings on the fight against Islamic State.

Mr. Kushner is the first member of Mr. Trump's inner circle to visit the country, currently engaged in a fight to drive the militant group from Mosul and other areas. He was invited here by the chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joe Dunford, who is on a visit to meet with U.S. and Iraqi commanders and troops.

The visit comes as the Trump administration is assessing the current strategy to combat Islamic State in Iraq, Syria and elsewhere.

Mr. Kushner, 36, a newcomer to foreign-policy issues, has taken an active role as an adviser to Mr. Trump on national security and foreign policy.

Last month, Mr. Kushner made, for a White House official, a rare appearance at the Pentagon, where he met Saudi Arabia's Deputy Crown Prince and Minister of Defense Mohammed bin Salman during his meeting with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis.

He has also been influential with his father-in-law on issues pertaining to Mexico and other countries, and he has been given broad authority by his father-in-law to broker a peace deal between the Israelis and the Palestinians.

Mr. Kushner, a multimilliionaire businessman and developer interested in how technology can reform organizations, launched an innovation office for the White House last week that intends to help reform government.

Mr. Kushner didn't speak with reporters on the trip into Iraq, his first ever trip here, which was preceded by an overnight stay at a U.S. military base in Germany.

He is accompanied by Tom Bossert, a former administration official under President George W. Bush who is now serving as Mr. Trump's homeland security adviser.

Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford are completing a review of the strategy to fight the group. Mr. Trump signaled during the campaign and since assuming office that he had a plan to accelerate the fight against Islamic State, offering no details about what it might be.

No plan has emerged, and it now falls to Mr. Mattis and Gen. Dunford to come up with a new strategy. Gen. Dunford declined to discuss what the new strategy would look like. But, according to numerous U.S. officials, the strategy may largely resemble the old one, initiated under President Barack Obama, with tweaks and additions in the margins, U.S. officials said.

Gen. Dunford said he invited Messrs. Kushner and Bossert to join him on the trip some weeks ago so they could see for themselves the work troops are doing here, since they will be part of the decision on strategy.

"I think anyone who's involved in the discussion on where we go strategically -- having good situational awareness about what's happening tactically and hear it first hand and unfiltered, how our advisers assess the Iraqi security forces, both the opportunities and the challenges -- will feed into somebody's strategic view," Gen. Dunford told the small group of reporters traveling with him on a military jet.

The new strategy, or a refinement of it, may include additional U.S. troops for both Iraq and Syria, possible changes that could put American soldiers closer to the front lines, and an accelerated airstrike campaign.

Under Mr. Obama last fall, the U.S. military had already been given additional authorities which essentially delegated decision making closer to the battlefield.

The visit comes as American and Iraqi troops fight to evict Islamic State militants from the northern Iraqi city of Mosul and prepare for a fight against the group in Raqqa, its self-declared de facto capital in Syria.

Meanwhile, the U.S. military is investigating a series of airstrikes in recent weeks that officials believe may be partly responsible for the deaths of scores of civilians in both Iraq and Syria. There was no new assessment from those investigations, Gen. Dunford said Sunday.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170403ed440001g
