World News: Generals Seek to Curb Friendly Fire

By Margaret Coker in Ankara, Turkey, Nathan Hodge in Moscow and Gordon Lubold in Washington 
669 words
8 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

The U.S. military's top officer met with his Russian and Turkish counterparts on Tuesday, seeking to avoid conflict among forces allied with the three countries as they converge on the Syrian battlefield.

The meeting of Marine Corps Gen. Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Russian Gen. Valery Gerasimov and Turkish Gen. Hulusi Akar in Antalya, Turkey, follows calls to improve communications after a number of deaths in what were deemed friendly-fire incidents.

It was scheduled last week after a Russian airstrike near Manbij hit Syrian forces trained by the U.S., according to a person familiar with the situation.

The U.S.-led military coalition fighting Islamic State has boosted its presence in and around Manbij, which was wrested from the extremist group's control last summer by U.S.-backed Arab and Kurdish forces.

The military chiefs met to improve communications at the senior level and to avoid interference among the military operations, Gen. Dunford's office said.

In a statement released Tuesday evening, the U.S. and Turkish militaries said the participants "discussed regional security matters in Syria and Iraq, specifically the current situation of the fight against all terrorist organizations in Syria with an effort to wage a more effective fight against all terrorist organizations in the future."

The countries support sometimes opposing parties in Syria's multisided conflict, now in its sixth year. As the campaign to eradicate Islamic State ramps up, their aims and operations have increasingly come into conflict.

Military protocols exist for communications between U.S. and Russian officers and between Turkish and Russian officers to coordinate air operations and bombing operations, but the fluidity of the battlefield and tensions between proxies in Syria have led to mistakes, U.S. and Turkish officials say.

Last month, an errant Russian airstrike called in by its pro-government Syrian allies killed three Turkish soldiers fighting to capture the town of al-Bab from Islamic State.

U.S. and Turkish officials described previous incidents as friendly-fire accidents and called for better communications to prevent similar occurrences.

Relations between Moscow and Washington have been chilly, but Gens. Dunford and Gerasimov met last month in Baku, Azerbaijan, the highest-level military-to-military contact between the two countries since January 2014.

The discussions about the situation on the ground follow efforts to avoid incidents in the skies over Syria among U.S., coalition and Russian aircraft. A U.S. airstrike in September in Deir Ezzour, Syria, that mistakenly killed Syrian forces also created major strain between Moscow and Washington.

At present, the U.S. and Russia have military dialogue under a memorandum of understanding signed in 2015. That agreement doesn't include the sharing or coordination of intelligence, something U.S. defense officials are quick to say isn't under consideration. It has, however, mandated a series of exchanges to ensure jet fighters and other aircraft don't hit each other.

But as aircraft operations over Syria increase, U.S. military officials say they see greater chances an air mishap could occur.

The U.S. has also faced tensions with Turkey over its backing of the YPG, Syrian Kurdish fighters the Pentagon views as the most capable local forces. Ankara sees them as an arm of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, a group that has fought for independence in southeastern Turkey.

U.S. Air Force Col. John Dorrian, a spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition, said the U.S.-backed coalition's moves around Manbij aimed to "deter hostile acts, enhance governance and ensure there's no persistent YPG presence."

The coalition, Col. Dorrian added, "has taken this deliberate action to reassure coalition members and partner forces, deter aggression and keep focus on defeating ISIS."

---

Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170308ed380000q
