U.S. News: Guilty Plea in Terror Case --- American is said to have accepted Islamic State funds to help pay for a U.S. attack

By Christopher S. Stewart and Mark Maremont 
756 words
17 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An American man accused of accepting funds from Islamic State for a possible terrorist attack in the U.S. pleaded guilty to multiple terrorism-related charges.

Mohamed Elshinawy, who was living in Maryland when he was arrested in late 2015, pleaded guilty in Baltimore federal court Tuesday to four counts, including conspiring to provide material support to Islamic State.

The Elshinawy case was critical in uncovering a global financial network centered on a British technology company used by Islamic State to clandestinely move money around the world and pay for weaponized-drone technology used by the terrorist group in Syria, the U.S. says.

Mr. Elshinawy, 32, faces as many as 20 years in prison for each of the three most serious terrorism offenses. Both Mr. Elshinawy and the government have the ability to appeal the sentence, according to the plea-bargain agreement.

A lawyer for Mr. Elshinawy couldn't be reached.

His is the first and only publicly known case in which Islamic State money flowed into the U.S. for a potential terrorist attack in America, according to Seamus Hughes, deputy director of George Washington University's Program on Extremism.

The plot appeared to be "more sophisticated than other ISIS cases in America," Mr. Hughes said.

Federal investigators initially were tipped off to Mr. Elshinawy through a $1,000 Western Union money transfer to him from Egypt in June 2015, sent by an Islamic State operative whom authorities haven't publicly identified, according to a Federal Bureau of Investigation affidavit and a person familiar with the situation.

FBI agents spent months tailing Mr. Elshinawy and combing through his transactions, eventually finding at least $8,700 he allegedly had received from Islamic State operatives.

To hide some of the money transfers, Mr. Elshinawy pretended to sell computer printers on eBay, then received funds from the British company through the online payment service PayPal, according to an FBI affidavit.

A spokesman for eBay Inc. said the company worked closely with law enforcement to bring Mr. Elshinawy to justice. "We have zero tolerance for criminal activity on eBay and have robust systems in place to identify and prevent it," he said, adding that "nothing indicated that these were anything but legitimate transactions."

A spokeswoman for PayPal Holdings Inc. said it "invests significant time and resources in working to prevent terrorist activity on our platform."

Mr. Elshinawy told FBI agents he was instructed to use the money for "operational purposes," which he understood to mean a terrorist attack.

He told agents he had no intention of carrying out such an attack and instead was taking money from "thieves," an FBI affidavit indicated.

Though several major U.S. attacks have been inspired by Islamic State, none are known to have been directly financed by the group, unlike attacks in Europe and elsewhere.

U.S. prosecutors have charged 131 people in terrorism cases connected to Islamic State, according to the George Washington University Extremism Program. Most are U.S. citizens or permanent residents; 77 have been convicted or pleaded guilty, including Mr. Elshinawy.

When Mr. Elshinawy hit the radar of federal investigators, he was living with a woman in a one-bedroom apartment in a bungalow complex outside Baltimore.

Born in Pittsburgh, Mr. Elshinawy mostly grew up in Egypt in a family of academics. By 2007, he was living in the U.S., according to his resume, which is posted online. He delivered newspapers, worked at a convenience store and at a company that sold firearm accessories and other outdoor supplies through eBay, the resume says.

Mr. Elshinawy returned to Egypt at least twice, where his parents still lived, according to former landlords and his resume. It was during a more-recent such trip that Mr. Elshinawy turned to Islamic State, federal investigators say.

He reunited there with a childhood friend who introduced him to a member of the terrorist group, which was looking for operatives in the U.S., a person familiar with the case said. They needed a "gofer," this person said, someone to support or carry out an attack.

In February 2015, Mr. Elshinawy pledged allegiance to Islamic State on social media and later said he planned to die a martyr, according to an FBI affidavit.

What he planned to attack in the U.S. is unclear.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170816ed8h00009
