World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,136 words
12 July 2017
13:07
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Junior League

The pressure inside the Trump White House is rising to new and dangerous levels. The revelation that the president's eldest son and senior campaign aides attended a meeting last year with a Russian lawyer to discuss what they were told was incriminating information about Hillary Clinton being offered by the Kremlin to help Donald Trump's candidacy is among the most explosive yet in the long-running Russia investigation. Donald Trump Jr. released emails himself on Tuesday that detail an exchange with U.K. publicist Rob Goldstone, who arranged the meeting. The emails appear to contradict the president's repeated statements casting doubt on the U.S. intelligence community's conclusion that Russia sought to interfere in the election. They reveal that Mr. Trump Jr. knew he was meeting with a foreign national who he was told was essentially a messenger for the Russian government. This raises potential legal issues for the younger Trump, creates a long-term problem for his father's administration and, writes our columnist Gerald F. Seib, kills any prospect that talk of Russian meddling would fade.

It's Academic

Google operates a little-known program that harnesses the brain power of university researchers to sway opinion and public policy. Over the past decade, the search-and-advertising giant has helped finance hundreds of research papers to defend against regulatory challenges to its market dominance, paying $5,000 to $400,000 for the work, according to our findings. Paying for favorable academic research isn't new among food, drug and oil companies. But Google's program highlights a behind-the-scenes push in Silicon Valley to sway decision makers in Washington. Critics worry such funding, which professors don't always reveal, could undermine academic credibility. In some years, a former Google employee and a former Google lobbyist said, the company compiled wish lists of academic papers, then searched for willing authors. Conclusions of some Google-backed research: The company hasn't unfairly quashed competitors, and its consumer-data collection is a fair exchange for its free services.

Medical Leave

Ratcheting up the pressure on fellow Republicans, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell set a vote on the GOP health-care bill for next week and delayed the August recess, buying time to seek legislative wins even if the health plan stalls. Sen. McConnell has struggled for days to turn health-plan holdouts to his side. To corral support, Senate Republican leaders are expected to retain the Affordable Care Act's two taxes on high-income households—n unusual move for the tax-averse GOP, but good for $230 billion over 10 years that could go to address concerns of GOP senators wary of the bill as it stands. The revised bill is expected to be released Thursday. While efforts continue, the Trump administration granted Alaska a waiver Tuesday to use ACA money to reimburse insurers for their costliest customers— model the administration urges other states to embrace.

The Making of a Networker

Good news for those who see themselves as introverts: The art of networking can be learned, says our columnist Sue Shellenbarger. Take Pradeep Aradhya, a software engineer who rose through the ranks at several companies and now owns his own consulting firm. Like many people trained in technology who move into jobs that require selling or managing others, Mr. Aradhya had to sharpen his social skills. He made the shift by polishing his image and conversational skills, trading in his dark suits for bright shirts and studying how others use humor. Spending six to eight hours a week interacting with people, Mr. Aradhya has embraced a networking mantra: "entertain, enlighten or enrich."

Today's Video

Apple Juice

Summer isn't a good time to buy an iPhone, as new models often debut in the fall. But what if your phone suffers from battery drain, a cracked screen or slowing performance? Our personal-tech columnist Joanna Stern offers tips on keeping your iPhone alive for the season.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Marine Plane Crash in Mississippi Kills 16 People Aboard

West Virginia Airport Officials Await Big Infrastructure Takeoff

WORLD

Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul After \b ISIS\b0  Defeat

Europe Wary as U.S. Scrutinizes Iran Nuclear Deal

BUSINESS

Arkansas Bans Herbicide as Farmers Blame Neighbors for Crop Damage

The $3 Peanut-Butter Club? Startup Tests Power of Brands

MARKETS

Shifting Monetary-Policy Outlook Imperils Rally in Emerging Markets

Funds Miss Out on Banks' Dividend Party

Number of the Day

$230 billion

The approximate amount the government would retain over 10 years if the health-care bill keeps two ACA taxes on high-income households. That is money Republicans could spend to address concerns of GOP senators wary of the bill.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on the implications of Donald Trump Jr.'s releasing emails showing he took a meeting with a Russian lawyer last year? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Cynthia Lin

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the U.S.'s raising pressure on China to halt North Korea's nuclear program, Thomas Snitch of Maryland shared: "Go back and read Sun Tzu's 'The Art of War'—he enemy of my enemy is my friend. It is not in China's national interest to effect change in Pyongyang. We all know that China always acts in their own best interest and thus it is foolish to expect them to lift a finger to help with North Korea." Adam Stickney of Ohio wrote: "Increased pressure on China is a patently smart move. If the military elite feel no direct confrontation is strategic, then indirect becomes a necessity. Putting pressure on China is a necessity." Mary Thompson of New Mexico weighed in: "I have zero confidence in China slowing or stopping North Korea's nuclear efforts. This is just another feel-good action, and North Korea will continue on its merry way."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170712ed7c00231
