World
Jim Mattis Says U.S. Isn't in Iraq to Take Its Oil; U.S. defense secretary is to assess the fight against Islamic State

By Gordon Lubold in Baghdad, Ben Kesling in Erbil, Iraq and Paul Sonne in Washington 
1,347 words
20 February 2017
23:25
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. isn't in Iraq to seize anybody's oil, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said Monday, deviating from comments by President Donald Trump ahead of a visit to the country, where American troops are now operating closer to the front line against Islamic State.

Mr. Mattis, a retired four-star Marine Corps general who led troops into battle during the invasion of Iraq in 2003, made the comments to reporters in Abu Dhabi before arriving Monday in Baghdad to assess the fight against Islamic State in Iraq.

"I think all of us here in this room, all of us in America, have paid for our gas and oil all along and I'm sure that we will continue to do so in the future," he told reporters. "We are not in Iraq to seize anybody's oil."

The comments by Mr. Mattis, on a seven-day visit to the Middle East, are at odds with remarks made repeatedly by Mr. Trump, who said as recently as last month that the U.S. should have taken Iraq's oil.

Speaking to employees at the Central Intelligence Agency on Jan. 21, Mr. Trump doubled down on campaign rhetoric in which he suggested the U.S. should have taken the oil in exchange for U.S. battlefield sacrifices there.

"The old expression, to the victor belonged the spoils, you remember, they always used to say, keep the oil," he said. "If we kept the oil, you probably wouldn't have ISIS, because that's where they made money in the first place," he added, using an acronym for Islamic State. Mr. Trump also hinted at the possibility of future operations in the country where the U.S. might do just that.

Meanwhile, as U.S. forces assisted Iraqi forces in western Mosul, the top commander there said U.S. troops were operating under less restrictive rules than they had been.

Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, the commander of U.S. forces in Iraq and Syria, acknowledged Monday that American troops are operating closer to the front lines of combat as they assist Iraqi forces, a significant loosening of the restrictions under which the military operated under during the Obama administration.

"It is true that we are operating closer and deeper into the Iraqi formation," Lt. Gen. Townsend said at a briefing at the military airport in Baghdad. "We adjusted our posture during the east Mosul fight and embedded advisers a bit further down into the formation."

Officials said the Pentagon used existing authorities provided under the previous administration but never before used to loosen the restrictions, allowing U.S. troops to operate with more latitude. Lt. Gen. Townsend said American forces, including combat advisers, trainers and others, are tied more closely to Iraqi forces than they had been.

The timing of the change suggests that the military was empowered by the election of Mr. Trump, who signaled a desire for a more aggressive fight against Islamic State. The Obama administration had sought to keep U.S. troops away from the front lines, an approach that at times frustrated the Pentagon.

U.S. military officials said that despite the adjustment, Iraqi forces remain in the lead and U.S. forces remain in an advise and assist role. Iraqi officials reiterate that sentiment.

The change gives trainers and advisers more latitude to work closely with Iraqi forces. It also provides permission for forces known as "forward air controllers" who help call in airstrikes, to conduct operations at a far more tactical level than before. The change pertains to about 450 troops across Iraq, according to Col. John Dorrian, a spokesman for the U.S. command in Baghdad.

Another separate change gives lower-level commanders, including one- and two-star generals, the power to approve airstrikes in some cases, a delegation of authority down from a three-star general or above.

The public acknowledgment of the changes comes as Iraqi and U.S. troops resume the campaign to remove Islamic State fighters from western Mosul after a weekslong pause in combat, Iraq's second largest city is the Sunni extremist group's last major Iraqi stronghold.

A January executive order by Mr. Trump that temporarily banned entry to the U.S. from citizens of seven Muslim-majority countries included Iraq, and has further fueled Baghdad's concerns about relations, including the fate of interpreters and other Iraqis who have worked with U.S. troops.

Mr. Trump said the measure was intended to curb the risk of terrorists entering the U.S. The White House is currently rewriting the order after it was suspended by a federal court.

"I have not seen the new executive order, but right now I am assured that we will take steps to allow those who fight alongside us for example to be allowed into the United States," Mr. Mattis said. "They will be vetted, obviously, by their performance on the battlefield beside us, and I'm sure we'll work through this quickly."

The Trump administration's mixed signals on Iraq come as American troops help local forces, including Iraqi armed forces and Kurdish Peshmerga troops, work to push Islamic State out of the country.

U.S.-backed troops have already ousted the extremist group from the eastern part of the city, but the density of the western side, across the Tigris River, poses challenges to the Iraqi forces and their American advisers, according to U.S. military officials.

Iraq's military, with air support from the U.S.-led coalition, restarted its offensive Sunday morning on the city after a pause in the campaign to retake Mosul, an effort that began in October.

The delay in operations stemmed in part from the heavy casualties taken by Iraqi special forces who slogged through much of the house-to-house fighting on the city's east side.

Iraqi ground forces took a key village on the edge of Mosul on Monday, reaching the outskirts of the city's airport as part of the renewed advance.

The Iraqi security forces pushed into the village of Albu Saif, the first major obstacle to retaking western Mosul from militants, according to military officials. The village sits on high ground and serves as a southern approach to the airport and a sprawling military base, which the Iraqi military used before the city fell to Islamic State in 2014.

The renewed assault on eastern Mosul comes as the Pentagon follows through on Mr. Trump's Jan. 28 executive order, which gives Mr. Mattis no more than 30 days to outline ways for the U.S. to accelerate the campaign against Islamic State and provide his official assessment of the military operation.

Mr. Mattis is expected to consider loosening restrictions under which the U.S. military forces operate even further. The Pentagon chief will also look at changes to intelligence sharing, battlefield logistics and tactics, he said Monday.

While in Iraq on Monday, Mr. Mattis emphasized that Iraqi forces were bearing the brunt of the fight against Islamic State militants and praised the progress the country's military has made, with the help of U.S. and other coalition members, in defeating the extremists.

"This is not something that was a foregone conclusion for an army that only a year ago many people were questioning," Mr. Mattis said. He said the U.S.-Iraqi military relationship, which has had highs and lows in the past, would endure.

"This is a partnership," Mr. Mattis said. "There have been a lot of rocky times out here, I imagine we'll be in this fight for a while, and we'll stand by each other."

Ghassan Adnan contributed to this article.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com, Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com and Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170220ed2k001jl
