Politics
Tillerson Starting Shuttle Diplomacy in Middle East, Hoping to Resolve Dispute Over Qatar; Washington fears conflict among U.S. allies will drag on for months

By Felicia Schwartz 
568 words
10 July 2017
19:33
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson arrived in the Persian Gulf region for a round of shuttle diplomacy aimed at resolving a conflict among U.S. allies that Washington fears will drag on for months.

The former Exxon Mobil Corp. chief executive, who has close ties to many Arab officials in the region and has attempted to mediate the dispute, is throwing himself more deeply into efforts to resolve differences between Qatar on one side and Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Bahrain and Egypt on the other.

The four countries accuse Qatar of funding terrorist groups and meddling in their domestic affairs, and severed diplomatic relations and imposed a transport ban on June 5. Qatar denies the allegations and accused the bloc of Arab nations of waging a smear campaign.

Top officials from the feuding nations have been passing through Washington in recent weeks, making their case to Mr. Tillerson and others.

The U.S. diplomat first traveled to Kuwait and later will head to Saudi Arabia and Qatar to try to bring the sides closer to a solution.

It is unclear if he will meet with Emirati and Bahraini officials this week.

"The purpose of the trip is to explore the art of the possible of where a resolution can be found," said R.C. Hammond, a communications adviser traveling with Mr. Tillerson. "Right now…e're months away from what we think would be an actual resolution and that's very discouraging."

Mr. Tillerson's trip to the Gulf follows stops in Ukraine and Turkey, where he headed after the summit leaders from the Group of 20 leading nations in Germany.

Last week, the foreign ministers of Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Bahrain and the United Arab Emirates met in Cairo to formally discuss Qatar's response to a list of demands that includes curbing diplomatic ties with Iran, severing links with the Muslim Brotherhood and closing the Al Jazeera television network.

"They did not accept [the responses], so after one round of exchange and dialogue, we are at an impasse," Mr. Hammond said.

Kuwait has been trying to mediate the conflict, and invited Mr. Tillerson to the region to lend a hand.

"The president has said—his is not a new instruction—Find a resolution,'" Mr. Hammond said. "Our job here is to keep people communicating and talking to each other."

The Trump administration has sent mixed messages about the dispute. Mr. Tillerson throughout has urged calm and moderation, calling on both sides to take steps to de-escalate tensions, while President Donald Trump at first hailed the severing of ties to Qatar as evidence of his own successful visit to the region and part of a push to crack down on terrorism financing.

But in a call last week with Egypt's President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, Mr. Trump urged "all parties to negotiate constructively to resolve the dispute."

The Trump administration's priority in the conflict is making sure that all parties cut off funds to terror groups, Mr. Hammond said.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

More

* Iraqi Leader Praises Near-Rout of \b ISIS\b0  From Mosul

* Five Things to Know About the Battle for Mosul

* Mosul Emerges From \b ISIS\b0  Siege

Document WSJO000020170710ed7a002gx
