World News: World Watch

697 words
27 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

JAPAN

BOJ Officials Call for

More Transparency

Some Bank of Japan officials called on the central bank to communicate clearly about its thinking on monetary policy, as speculation grows over whether and when it would tighten monetary policy, opinions submitted by board members earlier in June showed.

In the summary of board members' opinions submitted for a June 15-16 policy meeting, officials generally backed the bank's sticking with aggressive easing because the Japanese economy remains far from hitting the bank's 2% inflation target. Core inflation in April was 0.3%.

The expanding asset size of the central bank and an improving economy have triggered interest in its exit from aggressive easing, one official said.

"The bank needs to be accountable for its thinking on monetary-policy management, in order not to raise concern among market participants," the official said. The summary doesn't identify speakers by name.

Another official said the fundamental problem regarding the central bank's exit from aggressive easing is that "its timing cannot be foreseen," given that it is still far from hitting its 2% inflation target.

The expectation that the bank could raise rates this year continues to gain traction as the Federal Reserve raises rates and offers specifics on how it plans to trim its balance sheet.

In the June meeting, the Bank of Japan left interest rates unchanged and kept its promise to buy about 80 trillion yen ($720 billion) in Japanese government bonds each year. One official called for the 80 trillion yen annual target to be cut to 45 trillion yen, given that purchases of debt have fallen below the promised pace.

Gov. Haruhiko Kuroda, in a news conference following the June meeting, has rejected the idea that he should follow the Fed's steps and detail how the central bank might trim its assets.

-- Yoko Kubota

---

IRAQ

ISIS Pushing Back in

Mosul, Military Says

Iraq's Ministry of Defense says Islamic State fighters have launched a string of counterattacks in a western Mosul neighborhood that was previously declared free of IS.

The attacks come as Iraqi forces continue to move in on the last pocket of territory the militants hold in the Old City.

Army spokesman Brig. Gen. Mohammed al-Khodari says IS sleeper cells set fire to houses and cars on Sunday afternoon. Fighting lasted into the night in the Tanak neighborhood on Mosul's far western edge.

He says by Monday morning the situation was under control.

Iraqi forces launched an operation to retake the Old City -- the IS group's last stronghold in Mosul -- just over a week ago, more than eight months after the fight to retake Iraq's second-largest city officially began.

-- Associated Press

SOUTHEAST ASIA

Drug Haul Burned in

Myanmar, Thailand

Officials in Myanmar and Thailand burned illegal narcotics worth more than $800 million on Monday to mark the U.N. day against drug abuse and trafficking.

The move came as authorities struggle to stem the flood of illicit drugs in the region, with Thailand's justice minister last year saying the country's war on drugs was failing.

In Thailand's Ayutthaya province, more than 9 tons of drugs with a street value of more than 20 billion baht ($590 million) went up in smoke including methamphetamines, known locally as "yaba" or "crazy drug," according to police.

"Currently, we are able to take down a lot of networks, including. . .transnational networks bringing drugs into Thailand. . .to be shipped to Malaysia and other countries," Sirinya Sitthichai, secretary-general of the Office of Narcotics Control Board, told reporters in Ayutthaya.

In neighboring Myanmar, the police said they destroyed confiscated drugs worth around $217 million.

Myanmar remains one of the world's largest producers of illicit drugs, including opium, heroin and methamphetamines. Those narcotics are often smuggled into China.

Last year, lawmakers in Myanmar voiced disappointment over lackluster efforts to tackle the drug problem.

The market for methamphetamines has been growing in Southeast Asia, the United Nations has said. It estimates that Southeast Asia's trade in heroin and methamphetamine was worth $31 billion in 2013.

-- Reuters

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170626ed6r00010
