Best of the Web
Opinion
Facebook and Diversity; How far is Sheryl Sandberg's company leaning in?

By James Freeman 
803 words
3 May 2017
02:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

An earlier version of this article gave the incorrect percentage of women in technical roles at Facebook. Women account for 17% of technical roles at the company.

Now this is awkward. Just as Facebook Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg is rolling out a new book, along comes fresh evidence that America's most celebrated coach for women in the workplace seems to be presiding over a company that frustrates the relatively few women it employs. According to the Journal:

Last year, a longtime engineer at Facebook Inc. gathered data that revealed a controversial finding: Code written by women was rejected much more frequently than code written by their male colleagues, according to people familiar with the matter and screenshots of internal discussions viewed by The Wall Street Journal.

For many female engineers at Facebook, the finding confirmed long-held suspicions that their coding faced more scrutiny than men's.

The results touched off a debate within Facebook over alleged gender bias among some of its most-valued employees: the engineers who build the features used by nearly two billion people every month. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg was asked about the findings during a weekly town hall meeting.

The outcry prompted senior Facebook officials to conduct their own review of the engineer's study. In an internal post published a month later, Jay Parikh, Facebook's head of infrastructure, attributed any gap in rejection rates to an engineer's rank, not gender. Many employees interpreted this new analysis as a sign that female engineers weren't rising at the same rate as men who joined the company around the same time.

Ms. Sandberg, recently described by Bloomberg as the "Oprah of corporate America," has been highly critical of society at large for allegedly discouraging the ambitions of women. But at the smaller society called Facebook, where she has held a senior leadership role for nearly a decade and by all accounts has exercised tremendous influence, women occupy few of the key roles. To be fair, Facebook isn't much different from the other Silicon Valley giants, as the Journal notes:

Like other major tech companies, including Google parent Alphabet Inc. and Apple Inc., Facebook has struggled to increase the share of women and underrepresented minorities in its ranks.

The absence of women is particularly felt in engineering, which from college classrooms to the workplace has been seen as a man's field. Women account for 17% of technical roles at Facebook, according to its latest diversity report.

From everything we've been told, there is absolutely no shortage of highly sensitive progressives at the social-media giant, and yet the organization doesn't seem to be leaning in that far toward a more diverse workplace. There is of course an old-fashioned argument that an organization should simply seek to hire and promote employees based on the content of their character and their talent and forget about what people look like on the outside. And when it comes to gender there's an argument that men and women are different and may tend to have different preferences, regardless of what society tells them they should want. But those quaint views are endorsed by few large corporations in Silicon Valley or anywhere else.

So why do Facebook and Ms. Sandberg keep failing on their own terms? Perhaps the problem is her boss, Facebook Chairman and CEO Mark Zuckerberg, but he seems just as committed as Ms. Sandberg to expressing liberal pieties.

Until there's an answer to the question of why Facebook isn't a Sandbergian model of corporate responsibility, this column has a suggestion: Before offering any more guidance to the rest of American business, the Facebook crew should first demonstrate how to reconcile its political agenda with the business demands of competitive technology markets.

Bottom Stories of the Day

The Beatings Will Continue Until Morale Improves "Stifling growth in Illinois: Next step, raise the minimum wage higher than every border state's," Chicago Tribune, May 1

Fox Butterfield, Is That You? "New research shows AirPods hit 98 percent customer satisfaction despite supply shortages," 9to5Mac, May 1

How I Met Your Mother, Syrian Edition "The FBI translator who went rogue and married an ISIS terrorist," CNN, May 1

News You Can Use "Where teenagers are hiding their drugs, according to the DEA," Chicago Tribune, May 1

Look Out Below "Monsanto Drops Planting Unit Deal With Deere A Month Ahead Of DOJ Trial," Law360, May 1

You Used to Come for Bank Secrecy; You'll Stay for the Food! "Insect eating goes legal in Switzerland," Swiss Broadcasting Corporation, May 1

Follow James Freeman on Twitter.

Subscribe to the Best of the Web email with one click.

To suggest items, please email best@wsj.com.

(Carol Muller helps compile Best of the Web. Thanks to Richard Belzer, Zachary Keller, Alan Kuska, Tony Lima, Miguel Rakiewicz, and Wes Van Fleet.)

Document WSJO000020170502ed52001s1
