Life
The Resurgent Threat of al Qaeda; After bin Laden's death, it has become a vast and deadly network of groups spread from Syria to Yemen to Afghanistan

By Ali Soufan 
1,268 words
21 April 2017
17:03
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

In the nearly six years since Osama bin Laden was killed in Pakistan by U.S. Navy SEALs, the terrorist organization he founded has practically vanished from American news coverage. Al Qaeda has been eclipsed by the rise of the self-styled Islamic State— group that began as al Qaeda's Iraqi franchise but broke away in 2014.

It may appear that al Qaeda has simply declined, but that is very far from the truth. Since the death of its founder, it has transformed itself from a close-knit terrorist outfit with a handful of struggling affiliates into a vast network of insurgent groups spread from Southeast Asia to northwest Africa. Together, this network now commands an army of tens of thousands of Islamist militants. Years after bin Laden's death, they stand united in their commitment to his ideology. We have killed the messenger, but the message lives on.

In its first two decades, al Qaeda ("the base" in Arabic) focused on fighting the U.S. and its allies head-on. But in early 2011, amid the upheaval of the Arab Spring, bin Laden ordered an about-face in the group's aims. Instead of mainly pursuing the U.S. ("the far enemy"), he directed al Qaeda's franchises to turn inward and join the popular battle to bring down impious local Arab regimes ("the near enemy"). He hoped that this would build up al Qaeda's strength for an eventual showdown with the U.S. Bin Laden didn't live to see the fruits of this approach, but they have been considerable.

Islamic State was still formally part of al Qaeda when it made most of its territorial advances, and for the most part, it continues to espouse bin Laden's ideology. Islamic State is no longer aligned with al Qaeda, but sibling factions that remained loyal to al Qaeda have made stunning gains in their own right.

In Syria, more than 20,000 militants, according to regional press reports, follow the banner of the Liberation of the Levant Organization (formerly known as the Nusra Front), and they often battle their former jihadist comrades in Islamic State. In chaotic Yemen, al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula holds major sections of coastline and highways, allowing it to run a smuggling network and to keep local populations loyal by distributing goods and services. Since the Arab Spring, al Qaeda's Yemen branch has more than quadrupled its membership, from about 1,000 to at least 4,000 fighters, according to State Department estimates.

Across the Gulf of Aden in Somalia, al-Shabaab—he affiliate responsible for the notorious Westgate Mall attack in 2013—as increased its membership to at least 7,000, the Council on Foreign Relations estimates. It continues to attract recruits, including from Somali communities in the U.S.

In northwest Africa, al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb frequently targets Western tourists and aid workers. It recently absorbed several previously disparate factions, forming a jihadist conglomerate whose constituent groups (according to the Long War Journal) collectively carried out more than 250 attacks in 2016 alone.

Al Qaeda branches world-wide are gaining in numbers and fighting strength. Even in Afghanistan, where more than 2,000 U.S. soldiers have lost their lives battling al Qaeda and its Taliban allies since 9/11, U.S. forces discovered in 2015 the largest al Qaeda training camp to date, measuring some 30 square miles. Such groups are now more widespread and better armed, trained and organized than al Qaeda ever was while bin Laden was alive.

Bin Laden always envisioned an adaptable global network, and the new al Qaeda has distinct advantages over Islamic State. While the latter squanders blood and treasure defending its ever-dwindling "caliphate" in Syria and Iraq, al Qaeda's looser span across two continents makes it all but impossible to pin down. Where Islamic State focuses on the short-term (not least because it believes the End of Days is imminent), al Qaeda has demonstrated strategic patience, retreating and regrouping where necessary while keeping its eyes locked on its goals.

The most formidable al Qaeda franchises have embedded themselves within complex local conflicts in failing states such as Somalia, Yemen and Syria. If al Qaeda ultimately succeeds in these struggles, it will again possess stable home bases from which to launch ambitious attacks against the West. If it is defeated, it will simply morph again, from an insurgency back into a terrorist organization.

The same grim logic applies to Islamic State. After its self-styled caliphate falls, it will become what it was at its origins after the U.S. invasion of Iraq: an itinerant terrorist group, sowing chaos by murdering civilians—ost of them Muslim.

Such possible transformations raise the terrifying prospect of a reconciliation between al Qaeda and Islamic State. Today, the rival groups quarrel over the claim of Islamic State's "caliph" to lead all Sunni Muslims. But if Islamic State no longer governs territory, its leader is no longer a caliph, and the dispute falls away, opening the door to a merger between the groups. Whether they unite or not, it is only a matter of time before bin Laden's followers again turn their sustained attention back to the West and the U.S.

How should we respond to this threat? Military muscle alone won't do. We can kill as many terrorists as we want, but if more keep coming to fill jihadist ranks, we will make no headway. Defeating al Qaeda and its progeny requires cutting off their supply of recruits, and we can do that only by taking more effective action in the arena of ideology.

First, we must counter the false jihadist narrative that the West wants a "war against Islam." This would entail, for example, making good on our rhetoric about trying to end the conflicts in Syria and Iraq, avoiding the temptation to scapegoat all Muslims for the actions of a few terrorists and discouraging our leaders from inveighing against Islam itself.

We also must help to alleviate the humanitarian catastrophes that incubate terrorism. In Afghanistan in the 1980s, fundamentalist madrassas in refugee camps produced the Taliban—iterally, "pupils." We are now seeing a replay in Syria and Yemen, where millions of children go uneducated and face indoctrination by jihadists. Yet the Trump administration's budget plans threaten precisely the tools we need to meet these challenges—iplomacy and foreign aid.

Finally, we must do better at exposing the fundamental hypocrisy of a movement that claims to be the arbiter of true Islamic piety but routinely bombs mosques and marketplaces. We must craft a true and hopeful story to drown out the false and despairing one that terrorists tell.

Ultimately, the solution lies in tackling the root causes of radicalization, not just its symptoms. That is unlikely to generate footage exciting enough for cable news, but we can win only by becoming more tenacious than our enemy.

Mr. Soufan, a former FBI counterterrorism agent, is a private security consultant. This essay is adapted from his new book, "Anatomy of Terror: From the Death of bin Laden to the Rise of the Islamic State," which W.W. Norton will publish in May.

Related Reading

* What Happens After \b ISIS\b0  Falls?

* Syria Rebels Draw Closer to al Qaeda-Linked Group

* Countries Under U.S. Entry Ban Aren't Main Sources of Terror Attacks

Document WSJO000020170421ed4l003ml
