National Desk; SECTA
Stephen Bannon in 2014: A War With Radical Islam

By SCOTT SHANE 
1,419 words
2 February 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
15
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic Fascism

Speaking as Islamic State fighters battled their way across Iraq, seizing territory and shocking American and European officials, Mr. Bannon repeatedly stated that the United States was in a ''global war'' with radical Islam, which he sometimes describes as ''Islamic fascism.'' He emphasizes their targeting of Christians and their use of contemporary social media:

Now that call converges with something we have to face, and it's a very unpleasant topic, but we are in an outright war against jihadist Islamic fascism. And this war is, I think, metastasizing far quicker than governments can handle it.

If you look at what's happening in ISIS, which is the Islamic State of Syria and the Levant, that is now currently forming the caliphate that is having a military drive on Baghdad, if you look at the sophistication of which they've taken the tools of capitalism. If you look at what they've done with Twitter and Facebook and modern ways to fund-raise, and to use crowdsourcing to fund, besides all the access to weapons, over the last couple days they have had a radical program of taking kids and trying to turn them into bombers. They have driven 50,000 Christians out of a town near the Kurdish border. We have video that we're putting up later today on Breitbart where they've took 50 hostages and thrown them off a cliff in Iraq.

That war is expanding and it's metastasizing to sub-Saharan Africa. We have Boko Haram and other groups that will eventually partner with ISIS in this global war, and it is, unfortunately, something that we're going to have to face, and we're going to have to face very quickly.

What ISIS Wants

Mr. Bannon discusses the hopes of the Islamic State,also known as ISIS or ISIL, to slaughter people in Western Europe and the United States:

They have a Twitter account up today, ISIS does, about turning the United States into a ''river of blood'' if it comes in and tries to defend the city of Baghdad. And trust me, that is going to come to Europe. That is going to come to Central Europe, it's going to come to Western Europe, it's going to come to the United Kingdom. And so I think we are in a crisis of the underpinnings of capitalism, and on top of that we're now, I believe, at the beginning stages of a global war against Islamic fascism.

Secularism

Asked whether ''secularism or the Muslim world'' posed the greater threat to Judeo-Christian civilization, Mr. Bannon links the two:

It's a great question. I certainly think secularism has sapped the strength of the Judeo-Christian West to defend its ideals, right?

If you go back to your home countries and your proponent of the defense of the Judeo-Christian West and its tenets, oftentimes, particularly when you deal with the elites, you're looked at as someone who is quite odd. So it has kind of sapped the strength.

But I strongly believe that whatever the causes of the current drive to the caliphate was -- and we can debate them, and people can try to deconstruct them -- we have to face a very unpleasant fact: And that unpleasant fact is that there is a major war brewing, a war that's already global. It's going global in scale, and today's technology, today's media, today's access to weapons of mass destruction, it's going to lead to a global conflict that I believe has to be confronted today. Every day that we refuse to look at this as what it is, and the scale of it, and really the viciousness of it, will be a day where you will rue that we didn't act.

Vladimir Putin

A questioner asks about Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, and Mr. Bannon gives a mixed answer -- rejecting Mr. Putin's corruption but suggesting that ''the Judeo-Christian West'' could learn from his ''traditionalism.''

I'm not justifying Vladimir Putin and the kleptocracy that he represents, because he eventually is the state capitalist of kleptocracy. However, we the Judeo-Christian West really have to look at what he's talking about as far as traditionalism goes -- particularly the sense of where it supports the underpinnings of nationalism -- and I happen to think that the individual sovereignty of a country is a good thing and a strong thing. I think strong countries and strong nationalist movements in countries make strong neighbors, and that is really the building blocks that built Western Europe and the United States, and I think it's what can see us forward.

Western Response

Asked how the West should respond to the threat from radical Islam and ''not lose itself in the process,'' Mr. Bannon for the first time drops the adjectives and talked simply about the ''struggle against Islam.'' He connects the current world situation to centuries-old conflicts between Christianity and Islam.

I believe you should take a very, very, very aggressive stance against radical Islam. And I realize there are other aspects that are not as militant and not as aggressive and that's fine.

If you look back at the long history of the Judeo-Christian West struggle against Islam, I believe that our forefathers kept their stance, and I think they did the right thing. I think they kept it out of the world, whether it was at Vienna, or Tours, or other places... It bequeathed to us the great institution that is the church of the West.

Historic Conflict

Mr. Bannon is referring to two historic victories of Christian forces over Muslim attackers: One was in 732 in Tours, France, when Charles Martel successfully fought off Muslim horsemen under Abdul Rahman Al Ghafiqi. The other was in 1529, with the failed siege of Vienna by the Ottoman forces under Suleiman the Magnificent, the sultan of the Ottoman Empire. Mr. Bannon calls on his fellow Catholics to act during what he describes as a ''crisis.''

And I would ask everybody in the audience today, because you really are the movers and drivers and shakers and thought leaders in the Catholic Church today, is to think, when people 500 years from now are going to think about today, think about the actions you've taken -- and I believe everyone associated with the church and associated with the Judeo-Christian West that believes in the underpinnings of that and believes in the precepts of that and want to see that bequeathed to other generations down the road as it was bequeathed to us, particularly as you're in a city like Rome, and in a place like the Vatican, see what's been bequeathed to us -- ask yourself, 500 years from today, what are they going to say about me? What are they going to say about what I did at the beginning stages of this crisis?

Call to Action

In conclusion, Mr. Bannon presses his call for action -- without making clear what sort of action he seeks -- but also warns against what he calls ''our baser instincts.''

Because it is a crisis, and it's not going away. You don't have to take my word for it. All you have to do is read the news every day, see what's coming up, see what they're putting on Twitter, what they're putting on Facebook, see what's on CNN, what's on BBC. See what's happening, and you will see that we're in a war of immense proportions. It's very easy to play to our baser instincts, and we can't do that. But our forefathers didn't do it, either. And they were able to stave this off, and they were able to defeat it, and they were able to bequeath to us a church and a civilization that really is the flower of mankind, so I think it's incumbent on all of us to do what I call a gut check, to really think about what our role is in this battle that's before us.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Steve Bannon, chief strategist for President Trump, and Reince Priebus, White House chief of staff. (PHOTOGRAPH BY HILARY SWIFT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) 

Document NYTF000020170203ed220000k
