World
At Least 90 Killed in Blast Near Embassies in Afghan Capital; Explosion strikes near U.S. military headquarters in Kabul's Green Zone

By Jessica Donati and Ehsanullah Amiri 
1,189 words
1 June 2017
00:56
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL— truck packed with explosives detonated in the heart of the Afghan capital on Wednesday, killing at least 90 people as the country reels from an escalating militant campaign that is ramping up pressure on the Trump administration over how to counter the violence.

The massive blast struck during the morning rush hour on the outskirts of a heavily fortified part of the city known as the Green Zone where major embassies and U.S. military headquarters are located. It was the first time a truck bomb had struck in the area, and it collapsed buildings, blew out glass windows and sent a mushroom cloud of smoke over the city.

The Afghan intelligence agency blamed the Haqqani network, a militant group that is part of the Taliban insurgency. Afghan and foreign officials often blame the network for high-profile attacks in the capital, but the group rarely issues public statements or makes claims. The Taliban denied responsibility for the bombing; the Taliban typically avoids claiming attacks that kill many civilians.

Hospitals were flooded with victims of the attack, which wounded more than 400 people. The vast majority were Afghan civilians who had been commuting to work at government agencies, companies and foreign embassies on foot or in buses. The death toll from the blast was expected to rise as more bodies were discovered in the debris and collapsed buildings.

"When we come to the office, we don't know if we'll come back," said Ekramuddin Hamdard, an employee of an Afghan telecom company who spoke from his bed at Kabul's Emergency Hospital, where he was being treated for a head wound. "Every day is death for us," he added.

The blast came a week before the Afghan government of President Ashraf Ghani is to host a gathering of representatives of more than 20 countries to discuss political solutions to the long-running conflict with the Taliban.

It also came amid debate in the administration of President Donald Trump over the direction of U.S. policy in Afghanistan. The bombing would appear unlikely to alter that debate, though it may intensify it, one administration official said.

The Pentagon has recommended sending an additional 3,000—r possibly as many as 5,000—.S. troops to combat militant groups and assist the Afghan military. White House officials say it could be weeks before a final proposal is sent to the president for a decision.

Mr. Trump called Mr. Ghani on Wednesday to express his "deepest condolences," White House spokesman Sean Spicer said.

The Taliban, which has waged war against the U.S.-backed government for 16 years, has carried out increasingly devastating attacks in the capital since most foreign troops withdrew in 2014, with the goal of turning Afghans against the government by creating an impression of unmanageable chaos and instability.

The group has also taken advantage of the vacuum left by foreign troops to seize swaths of territory and threaten at least half a dozen major cities.

The Pentagon fears that territorial losses by the Afghan government could allow foreign terrorists to use Afghanistan as a haven, as it did when the Taliban government hosted late former al Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden, blamed for the Sept. 11 attacks in the U.S.

There was no immediate response to the attack from the Taliban's Islamist rival, the local branch of Islamic State, which in the past year has expanded its operations beyond its stronghold in eastern Nangarhar province and carried out large attacks in Kabul. Islamic State cooperates with the Taliban in some parts of Afghanistan but has clashed with them in others, as they compete for territory.

Afghanistan and Iraq, both of which are embroiled in fights against violent religious extremists, have been hit by a spate of attacks since the start of Ramadan on Saturday. The holy month is a time of prayer and spiritual reflection for many Muslims, who fast during daylight hours. But some extremist groups such as Islamic State claim killing enemies is a noble act during the period.

With the Taliban and Islamic State turning increasingly to vehicle-borne bombs, Afghan and foreign officials have been bracing for the possibility of a large assault on Kabul's busy center.

Emergency Hospital, itself damaged in the blast, received more than a hundred victims in the first half-hour after the attack, officials there said.

Relatives cried outside the gates, while others scoured lists of casualties for names of family members and friends.

Afghans working for government agencies, media organizations and foreign embassies were among the dead in the rush-hour explosion. They included 10 Afghan security personnel working for the U.S. government, according to an internal U.S. State Department update. A driver for the Afghan service of the British Broadcasting Corp. was also killed.

Eleven U.S. citizens working as contractors in Kabul were injured, a State Department official said, adding that none of their injuries appeared life threatening.

An Afghan guard at the German embassy was killed and German diplomatic staff were injured in the explosion, German Foreign Minister Sigmar Gabriel said. The blast destroyed the outer walls of the compound and caused severe damage to the buildings inside.

"I was in the makeup room preparing for my morning show. A huge boom shook the room and everything collapsed. It was terrible," said Taban Ibraz, an anchor for Afghan television network 1TV, located near the blast. "The entire studio, newsroom and offices have been destroyed."

An employee of Roshan, a mobile phone company, said many of his colleagues were killed and wounded in the blast. "The two floors of office building collapsed completely as a result of the explosion," he said. Then, the "office's generators caught fire as well."

Wednesday's carnage marked the first major attack on Kabul since March, when Islamic State fighters disguised as doctors broke into a military hospital and massacred scores of people. The final death toll of that assault remains unknown, but Afghan and foreign officials have said more than 100 may have been killed.

In addition to calling for the deployment of more U.S. troops in Afghanistan, the Pentagon has proposed that U.S. forces be allowed to target the Taliban directly on their own. Currently, under procedures approved during the administration of former President Barack Obama, the U.S. can strike the militant group only in joint raids with Afghan forces.

There are currently 8,500 U.S. troops in the country, along with 6,500 troops representing members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Andrea Thomas, Maria Abi-Habib, Felicia Schwartz, Carol E. Lee and Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com

Related

* In Afghanistan, Battle With \b ISIS\b0  Grinds On After 'Mother of All Bombs' (April 17)

* Suicide Bomber Kills Five in Kabul (April 12)

* Dozens Killed in \b ISIS\b0  Attack on Kabul Military Hospital (March 8)

Document WSJO000020170531ed5v000rt
