World
U.S. Says Russia Attacked Site Near American-Led Coalition in Syria; Russian forces hit a target near Deir Ezzour

By Ben Kesling in Baghdad, Nathan Hodge in Latakia, Syria and Felicia Schwartz in Washington 
490 words
17 September 2017
01:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Russian military forces on Saturday attacked a location in Syria where they knew troops from the U.S.-led coalition and allied Syrian rebels were operating, the U.S. military said.

The strike injured several Syrian Democratic Forces troops but didn't wound any members of the U.S.-led coalition, according to the statement from the Combined Joint Task Force--Operation Inherent Resolve, after the Russian forces hit a target east of the Euphrates River near Deir Ezzour.

Maj. Gen. Igor Konashenkov, a spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry, said such an incident wasn't possible but didn't elaborate.

American and Russian forces have an open communications line to discuss operations that could overlap, especially air operations, to prevent midair collisions or the targeting of troops incorrectly. The communications line apparently wasn't used in this instance.

"Coalition officials are available and the deconfliction line with Russia is open 24 hours per day," said the top-ranking American officer in the coalition, Lt. Gen. Paul Funk, in the statement released Saturday.

The coalition didn't respond to requests to clarify whether the attack was an airstrike and provided no further details on the matter.

The statement didn't say whether the coalition troops threatened to fire at the Russian forces, but it reiterated that "coalition forces and partners always retain the right of self-defense."

Russia has recently stepped up its military efforts in Deir Ezzour where Islamic State still has a stronghold. The Russians have taken journalists on one of their Navy frigates to watch the launch of cruise missiles into Deir Ezzour as a public demonstration of their capabilities and as a rebuke to U.S.-led coalition forces, who Russians say aren't doing enough.

Russian forces have also ramped up their air campaign, sending more sorties into Syria to bomb Islamic State-held areas and to show their support for the regime of Bashar al-Assad. That has included actions against moderate groups opposed to Mr. Assad, not just Islamic State.

"The recent U.S.-Russian de-escalation deal in southwest Syria, which gave the regime and Shiite militias a chance to fight ISIS, was supposed to come with greater Russian commitments to deconflict with the U.S. and its proxy the SDF along the Euphrates River," said Andrew Tabler, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Middle East Peace who focuses on Syria. "Today's strike, as well as Russian announcements in last few days that it and the regime intend to cross over the Euphrates, has called the deal into question."

Ben Leubsdorf contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com and Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170916ed9g001gt
