Arts
Art and Life Collide in ‘omeland' and ‘4:Legacy'; Writers on TV series such as ‘omeland' and ‘4: Legacy' aim to create riveting dramas without sensationalizing real-life terrorism

By John Jurgensen 
1,253 words
11 January 2017
18:44
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Filming the climax of the most recent season of "Homeland," the producers saw their TV fiction collide with a ghastly reality. The shoot, in November 2015, featured an attempted poison-gas attack in a Berlin rail station. Just days before, violence had engulfed the real city of Paris. Terrorists affiliated with Islamic State killed 130 people in an assault centered on the Bataclan concert hall.

"It was a profoundly disturbing moment for all of us," says Alex Gansa, lead writer and producer of the Showtime series. The Berlin finale was shot as planned, but his team's soul searching—ere they sensationalizing?—ncreased their commitment to realism for the sixth season, premiering Sunday.

"We didn't want to falsely portray dangers that don't exist. There's enough fear, fear-mongering and real causes for fear that we needed to not pile on," Mr. Gansa adds.

"Homeland" returns within weeks of the TV franchise that laid the groundwork for it: "24," which started two months after 9/11 and played out as a hot-blooded response to the 2001 attacks. In "24: Legacy," a spinoff premiering Feb. 5 on Fox, the hero is a former Army Ranger being hunted by a terrorist death squad.

Creators of these shows are grappling with producing escapist drama that sometimes mirrors real attacks across the world. They have to keep up with current events yet not exploit them. Adding to the tension (and providing story fodder for thrillers as well as series in other genres) is a new and unpredictable administration coming to the White House.

"There is a responsibility. You can't just hide behind the fact that it's a TV show," says Howard Gordon, an executive producer of "Homeland" and "24: Legacy." As the "24" showrunner for the series's most popular and polarizing seasons during the 2000s, Mr. Gordon faced blowback over protagonist Jack Bauer torturing people to extract information about looming attacks. Amid revelations about prisoner abuse at Abu Ghraib, critics wondered if the show was normalizing torture.

"My conscience is a lot more sensitive than it was 15 years ago," Mr. Gordon says. "Because [TV] has so much reach, you have to recognize that the stuff you're doing is going to be scrutinized."

The ticking-clock format of "24," with each episode spanning one hour in a potentially catastrophic day for society, meant that the show was over the top by definition. "24: Legacy" also operates on overdrive, but producers say they have tried to ground the series in reality. Gone are the weapons of mass destruction that Jack Bauer raced to intercept, replaced by radicalized youth and the threat of grassroots attacks in unexpected places.

"They're not nuclear bombs, but in their own way they're just as horrifying because they really hit you on a level that you can understand," says executive producer Manny Coto.

He points out that the narrative unfolds in a "parallel universe" distinct from the real world. "‘4' is its own extrapolation of the worst possible scenario" of terrorism, says Mr. Coto, who co-created "24: Legacy" with Evan Katz. Both men were writers and producers on the original "24," which spanned nine seasons and a TV movie.

Other series are exploring the intersection of counterterrorism and politics at a moment of heightened uncertainty in both domains. ABC's "Designated Survivor" (returning in March for the second half of its first season) stars Kiefer Sutherland, Jack Bauer in the original "24," whose character becomes president after a bombing wipes out much of the government. The show has presented a cornucopia of threats, from document leaks to a ricin scare.

In "Six," premiering Jan. 18 on History, fictional members of Navy SEAL Team Six regroup to rescue a comrade (Walton Goggins) kidnapped by militant Islamist group Boko Haram.

"24" and "Homeland" share some creative DNA. After "24," Mr. Gordon created "Homeland" with Mr. Gansa, a longtime friend and former writer on ‘24" who has been the showrunner on "Homeland" from the start. Mr. Gordon still has a hand in that show as an executive producer, but spends most of his time shepherding "24: Legacy."

"Homeland," adapted from an Israeli TV series, gave them a clean slate. Like "24," it imagined grand-scale domestic attacks, but also examined the ripple effects from the global war on terror. Viewers have found themselves sympathizing with a fictional U.S. Marine who had been turned against his country while being held hostage by an al Qaeda leader.

"‘omeland' has had a chance to explore those things with a lot more depth and nuance than ‘4' ever could and ever will be able to," Mr. Gordon says.

Season 6 of "Homeland" is set in New York City. The show introduces a character named Sekou Bah (J. Mallory McCree), who attracts FBI scrutiny for his firebrand internet posts. He uploads a series of videos of sites related to real-life events in New York, such as Faisal Shahzad's unsuccessful attempt to detonate a car bomb in Times Square.

The storyline dwells more on Sekou Bah testing the limits of free speech than a hypothetical threat to New York. That decision came out of an annual trip that "Homeland" writers make to Washington for research. They get off-the-record tutorials from White House officials, journalists and intelligence veterans, including former CIA director Michael Hayden.

"We were told that there aren't coordinated ISIS or al Qaeda networks in the U.S. like there are in Europe," Mr. Gansa says. Thus, a made-up narrative about a local plot to cripple New York would be "counterfactual and it would be bad karma."

Instead, writers zeroed in on the "delicate process" of the transfer of presidential power. The entire season takes place in the weeks leading up to a fictional president's inauguration. Elizabeth Marvel plays the New York-based president-elect. In the premiere, she is briefed by intelligence chiefs and expresses skepticism about their agenda and methods.

The episode was shot long before Donald Trump won the White House and went on to dismiss intelligence agencies' report that Russia tried to hack the election. In response to the plague of fake news during the real U.S. campaign, "Homeland" writers expanded on a character who spreads disinformation about the president-elect before she is sworn in.

Corey Hawkins (best known for playing Dr. Dre in "Straight Outta Compton") plays the hero of "24: Legacy"—ric Carter. He's a young soldier, not a grizzled agent with baggage like Jack Bauer. The new protagonist's motivation seems less clear cut than his predecessor's. As an African-American, Mr. Carter is a patriot questioning what it means to protect "a country that has often been less than good to black people," Mr. Gordon says.

Current events weren't the only thing that influenced the producers' decision to resurrect "24." They also hoped the weekly race-the-clock format of "24: Legacy" can grab viewers at a time when many have given up on broadcast television or ignore shows until they can binge-watch.​It's gotten harder and harder to hold the audience's attention," Mr. Coto says. "That's one thing ‘4' was always good at."

Write to John Jurgensen at john.jurgensen@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170111ed1b006sh
