World News: Car Bombings Kill Dozens in Baghdad --- Attacks come days after Iraqi military steps up campaign against Islamic State

By Ghassan Adnan and Ben Kesling 
563 words
31 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

BAGHDAD -- Two car bombings in the Iraqi capital early Tuesday killed at least two dozen people and injured 60 others, Iraqi officials said, in attacks that targeted families during the holy month of Ramadan.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for a blast outside a popular ice-cream shop in Baghdad just after midnight that Iraqi officials said killed at least 14 people and injured 30 others. The Sunni extremist group said it sought to kill Shiites in the Karrada neighborhood, which has been targeted by major bombings in the past.

In a separate attack, hours after the ice-cream shop explosion, a car bomb was detonated outside the main pension office in Baghdad, killing at least 10 people and injuring around 30, Iraqi officials said. No group claimed responsibility for the bombing.

The attacks came days after the Iraqi military began another phase of the campaign against Islamic State militants in the northern Iraqi city of Mosul after months of brutal house-to-house combat.

"The Daesh terrorist group attacks people during Ramadan days, this is evidence of how evil this group is," Interior Minister Qassim al-Araji said, using another name for Islamic State. "Everything has a price and this is the price of freedom," he said.

The holy month of Ramadan is a time of prayer and spiritual reflection for many Muslims, who fast during daylight hours. Some extremist groups such as Islamic State, however, claim killing enemies is noble and more worthy during the period.

Iraqis usually spend time with family and friends during Ramadan, often crowding restaurants and cafes late into the night after breaking their fasts.

The Faqma ice-cream shop is a popular destination for families and couples in the Iraqi capital.

Unconfirmed social-media posts in the aftermath of the bombing showed children weeping as they wandered through flaming rubble. Bloodstained sidewalks outside the shop were littered with pink ice-cream cups dropped in the melee.

"ISIS terrorists tonight in Baghdad target children & families enjoying time together at an ice cream shop," Brett McGurk, the U.S. envoy for the coalition fighting Islamic State said in a tweet soon after the bombing. "We stand w/Iraq against this evil."

High-profile bombings like the ice-cream parlor attack are interspersed with other, smaller blasts that happen almost daily in Baghdad. They are a reminder of Islamic State's ability to terrorize people in enclaves of the nation's capital that were thought to be protected.

In July 2016, Islamic State claimed a truck bombing that killed more than 300 people in the Karrada neighborhood, many of them trapped by fire in a shopping mall as they prepared for celebrations marking the end of Ramadan. The huge blast, which took place before the launch of the offensive against Islamic State to push them from their Iraqi stronghold of Mosul, had raised questions about security inside the Iraqi capital.

Though they have all but lost Mosul, Islamic State still controls pockets of territory in the country, including some smaller towns.

After Mosul is retaken, the Iraqi military and Kurdish Peshmerga fighters are expected to turn to those areas to drive the militant group from Iraq.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170531ed5v00017
