U.S. News: In Budget, Foreign Grants Would Become Loans

By Felicia Schwartz 
768 words
22 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump's budget proposal this week will include provisions to end many foreign military grants administered by the State Department and replace them with loans, a move that could affect up to $1 billion in aid to dozens of countries if Congress approves, U.S. officials said.

An internal State Department memo reviewed by The Wall Street Journal names Pakistan, Tunisia, Lebanon, Ukraine, Colombia, the Philippines and Vietnam as among countries that could be affected.

Typically, the State Department's Office of Security Assistance receives about $6 billion to dispense as military aid grants. That sum includes $3.1 billion for Israel, about $350 million for Jordan and about $1.3 billion for Egypt. Those grants will be preserved in the 2018 budget, officials said.

Pakistan, which usually receives about $265 million in grant assistance, will see that number go down to about $100 million under the new budget, officials said.

Most other countries will see their assistance converted from grants to loans.

The grants have allowed countries to buy U.S. equipment such as ammunition, vehicles and naval boats.

Mr. Trump's administration is set to release his full budget proposal Tuesday. The administration is considering cuts of up to 31% to the State Department and the U.S. Agency for International Development, the Journal has reported.

Mr. Trump's budget is expected to propose large cuts to domestic programs and safety-net spending, such as Medicaid, food assistance and other antipoverty efforts, to curb deficits over the coming decade without touching the largest drivers of federal spending -- Social Security and Medicare.

Altogether, the budget will seek to reduce funding by $1.7 trillion over a decade to entitlement programs such as Medicaid and food assistance, whose use swelled after the 2007-09 recession, according to a person familiar with the matter.

The president will also propose increases in funding for the U.S. military, infrastructure and border security.

Congressional officials, along with current and former U.S. officials, said a concern is that eliminating the military-grant program would cause countries to look to U.S. rivals, such as Russia and China. The internal State Department memo outlines what officials see as the likely effects of cuts.

"Without such assistance, partners will likely either not develop/sustain those capabilities, or may turn to other countries (e.g., Russia, China) to assist them in developing them," the memo says.

The internal memo says most countries offered loans are unlikely to take them.

"Converting FMF grants to a loan support mechanism will not assist the vast majority of countries that receive this support, since they would not desire to take out, or would not qualify for an international loan," the memo says.

Officials with the White House's Office of Management and Budget didn't respond to questions about the cuts, and have deferred comment until the full budget is released. Officials from most potentially affected countries didn't address the comments.

Pakistan's ambassador to the U.S., Aizaz Chaudhry, said: "Pakistan believes that our relations with the U.S. are a high priority. The two countries need to further strengthen mutually beneficial economic, trade and investment relations."

Mr. Trump has spoken frequently about what he sees as the need for U.S. partners abroad to pay for more of their own defense needs and for Washington to focus on U.S. priorities. But a congressional aide said the shift from grants to loans was unlikely to "play very well" among lawmakers.

"There's real concerns among authorizers over this," he said. "If you care about U.S. influence with these countries for counterterrorism and national security purposes, this will go a long a way to kill it."

The memo cites Lebanon, which it said "may lack the ammunition and vehicles necessary to maintain operations against ISIS" without the U.S. grant program.

Cameroon, Chad and Niger, "may be unable to maintain their airlift, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance and protected mobility capabilities necessary to defeat Boko Haram," the memo says.

The cuts could affect Ukraine's ability to deploy countermortar radars in its struggle with pro-Russia separatists backed by Moscow, the memo says.

Andrew Shapiro, a former Obama administration official who headed the State Department's bureau of Political Military Affairs, said the grant program benefits U.S. diplomats and U.S. companies.

"The program helped ambassadors, defense attaches and visiting officials develop relationships," he said.

---

Nick Timiraos contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170522ed5m00024
