The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
Listen to ‘he Daily’ Counting Civilian Casualties in Iraq

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
537 words
17 November 2017
12:12
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device :  Via Apple Podcasts  | Via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

Basim Razzo lost his family and his home in an airstrike by the American-led coalition fighting the Islamic State. Video of the strike shows a target hit with military precision.

Why was Mr. Razzo’ home targeted? And how often does this happen?

Today’ show is the second of two parts about civilian casualties in Iraq. If you missed Part 1, you can find it here.

Today’ guests:

•asim Razzo, who survived an airstrike on his home in Mosul, Iraq.

•zmat Khan, an investigative reporter who has spent 18 months looking into civilian casualties in the war on the Islamic State.

Background reading:

•The investigation by Ms. Khan and Anand Gopal, the focus of this week’ Times Magazine, concludes that one in five strikes in the U.S.-led campaign results in civilian death, a rate more than 31 times higher than acknowledged.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if you’e interested in advertising with “he Daily,”rite to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

From your mobile device:

You can listen and subscribe to “he Daily”rom any podcast player. If you’e reading this from an iPhone or other Apple mobile device, tap this link to listen in Apple Podcasts. If you’e on an Android device, tap this link to listen in Stitcher or this link to listen in RadioPublic.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Christopher Werth, senior producer; Annie Brown, producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director.

Azmat Khan contributed reporting.

* Listen to ‘he Daily’ Targeting \b ISIS\b0 , and Killing Civilians

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Basim Razzo survived a coalition airstrike on his home in Mosul, Iraq, in 2015. His wife, daughter, brother and nephew were killed. | Giles Price/Institute, for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171117edbh003s5
