World News: Russia Cautions U.S. Over Syria

By Thomas Grove in Moscow and Aresu Eqbali in Tehran 
865 words
20 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Russia escalated tensions with the U.S. on Monday, promising to track U.S. and coalition aircraft over Syria with its air defense systems and warplanes, the Defense Ministry said.

In a statement Monday, the Russian military said it would treat U.S. and coalition aircraft operating west of the Euphrates River as "aerial targets," but stopped short of threatening to shoot them down.

"In regions where the Russian air force is carrying out operations in the skies above Syria, any flying objects -- including airplanes and drones of the international coalition -- discovered west of the Euphrates River will be treated as aerial targets for tracking by land and air defense systems," the statement said.

U.S. defense officials said they were staying in touch with the Russian military to see what the practical impact of the statement might be on air operations in Syria. Defense officials said there were no immediate steps taken to curtail air operations as a result of the Russian warnings.

Pentagon spokeswoman Dana White reiterated the U.S. position that the military wanted to avoid direct confrontations with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his allies so it could focus it firepower on Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"The U.S. and its coalition partners are not in Syria to fight the Syrian regime or pro-regime forces," she said. "We are there to defeat ISIS. However, we will not hesitate to defend ourselves, the coalition or its partners."

Russia's threat was in response to the U.S. downing of a Syrian government jet over the weekend, the first time a U.S. pilot has shot down a regime aircraft during the six-year conflict.

Russia's Defense Ministry also said it would pull out of an agreement between Moscow and Washington to cooperate in the crowded skies above Syria, where U.S. coalition planes operate alongside Syrian and Russian aircraft.

This isn't the first time Russia has escalated its rhetoric over Syria. Earlier this year, Moscow pulled out of the memorandum on military coordination after U.S. President Donald Trump ordered a Tomahawk missile strike at the Shayrat air base in western Syria in early April. Washington and Moscow subsequently confirmed they would resume the agreement.

While the U.S. has stepped up direct military action against Syrian government forces in recent weeks, the Russian government has pushed a narrative that Washington is hampering its efforts to target Islamic State.

In a recent Moscow briefing, Col. Gen. Sergei Surovikin, the commander of Russian forces in Syria,condemned U.S. strikes on Syrian regime forces, saying they were aimed at thwarting the advances of the Syrian government.

The coalition strikes, he said, "blocked the way for government troops that carry out the task of destroying the ISIS groupings," adding that recent actions were a violation of Syrian sovereignty.

"It creates the impression that it is the government forces of Syria, not the terrorists of ISIS, that present the real danger to the coalition," Gen. Surovikin said.

The downing of the aircraft comes amid a shifting situation on the ground in Syria.U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces are battling to capture the Islamic State stronghold of Raqqa. Mr. Assad'sforces, backed by the Russians and Iranians, have advanced east from Aleppo province into neighboring Raqqa province, putting them on a collision course similar to the confrontations happening in southeast Syria.

There, the U.S. has fired on pro-regime forces and downed an Iranian drone to stop an advance toward U.S.-backed rebels fighting ISIS near the Jordanian and Iraqi borders.

A spokesman for the U.S.-backed Syrian Democratic Forces said Mondaythat the regime forces began widespread attacks on themSundayusing warplanes, artillery fire and tanks on areas that the SDF had previously captured from Islamic State around the Tabaqa Dam.

"If the intention of the regime's repeated attacks on our forces is to terminate the liberation of Raqqa city, we stress that continued regime attacks on our forces in Raqqa will compel us to respond in a similar manner," spokesman Talal Silo said.

On Sunday, Iran's Revolutionary Guards force launched missile strikes at Islamic State in one of its last Syrian strongholds, Deir Ezzour province.

Those strikes were retaliation for a June 7 attack on Iran's parliament and a shrine in Tehran claimed by the terror group, and Iranian state television on Monday aired celebratory footage of the strikes, which were launched by mobile systems in the western Iranian provinces of Kermanshah and Kordestan. Iranian state TV also showed the drone-sent footage of the targets being hit.

Iranian officials from across the political spectrum praised the missile attack, including Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif.

"Terrorist supporters should receive Iran's message of power," Mohsen Rezai, secretary of the prominent Expediency Council and former commander of Iran's hard-line Revolutionary Guards force was quoted as saying by state TV.

---

Nathan Hodge in Moscow, Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut and Dion Nissenbaum in Washington contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170620ed6k0001l
