Global Issues
The Learning Network; Lesson Plans
Examining How the Syrian Crisis Has Shaped the Lives of Young Refugees: A Guest Lesson Plan

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
1,552 words
26 April 2017
14:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Note: Occasionally we partner with outside organizations who make especially good use of New York Times materials in their programming and curriculums. For example, this guest lesson on climate change was written by members of NASA’ Goddard Institute for Space Studies; this one about navigating life online was created by a writer at Common Sense Media; and this one about espionage was written by the y outh education director at the International Spy Museum.

Below, we feature a g uest lesson plan created by the Global Nomads Group, an international organization that creates interactive educational programs —nline platforms, video conferences, media and other learning materials —or students about global issues, to foster dialogue and understanding among the world’ youth . This lesson is designed to prepare students to participate in a live webcast on Wednesday, May 3, open to young people anywhere in the world who wish to participate.

_________

Background: As of December 2016, 4.8 million registered Syrian refugees had left their country. And 6.1 million more are internally displaced, which means they were forced to move within Syria. In other words, more than half of Syria’ 22 million citizens have left their homes because of the civil war that started in 2011. Youth are particularly vulnerable. Many young Syrians lost their security, homes and access to education.

These numbers can make the conflict seem too big or overwhelming to fix. But behind the statistics, there are stories of real people trying to build new homes for their families. There are youth working to improve their situations and the smaller challenges they face every day.

In this lesson plan, students will examine the effect of the Syrian crisis on the lives of young people from that country, especially those who are refugees. This lesson is part of a larger program organized by the Global Nomads Group, which includes this curriculum guide for teachers (PDF) as well as a live webcast involving Syrian refugee children and youth from around the world.

_________

Lesson Plan

Teacher’ Note: This lesson plan includes several suggestions so that teachers can choose the resources that will be most helpful and appropriate for their students. The resources listed include longer and shorter articles, as well as multimedia features such as slide shows and videos that require access to a computer and the internet to view. This guide also includes suggestions for ways to adapt the lesson to use specific resources.

Teachers are encouraged to:

■ Read the articles and watch the videos listed in steps 2 and 3 below in advance. Choose the stories of young Syrian refugees that will be interesting to your students.

■ Adapt plans and preparations for the lesson to give students enough time to read the articles, watch videos and use multimedia features you choose. This may include taking additional time (or more than one session) for the lesson.

■ Consider omitting any of the stories that may be too difficult or overwhelming for any of your students.

■ Consider choosing only one or two stories of Syrian young people for the entire class to explore together. (The stories of Hana Abdullah and Bayan Mohamed, listed below, are especially recommended in this case.)

________

1. Warm-up: Ask students to write a response to the following questions:

•hat do you know or have you heard about the crisis in Syria?

•ow do you think this war has affected Syrian young people?

Then, have students share their responses with the class.

Alternatively, if you plan on using the entire “eimagining Syria: Sharing Our Stories”urriculum, distribute Handout 1.1, Pre-program Assessment (PDF) and follow the instructions in the teacher curriculum guide.

2. Read and watch the stories of young Syrian refugees. Organize students into small groups. Explain that each group of students will focus on the story of a young Syrian refugee. Explain that they will read or watch the story, then research how the crisis in Syria has shaped that young person’ life and experience.

Give students time to read the articles or watch the videos.

Young Syrians Refugees: Six Stories

Hana Abdullah —“The Displaced: Hana”

Twelve-year-old Hana lives in a refugee settlement in Lebanon. She and others in her family work picking fruit and vegetables in nearby fields in the Bekaa Valley.

Bayan Mohammad —“Wonder and Worry as a Syrian Child Transforms”

A 10-year-old Syrian refugee resettles in Canada through a private sponsorship program in that country.

Hisham al-Najjar —“After Escape From Syria, Another Dangerous Foe: Diabetes”

A 5-year-old boy living with Type 1 diabetes and his family cope with their new circumstances as refugees in Jordan.

Yusra Mardini —“She Swam to Escape Syria. Now She’l Swim in Rio”

Yusra Mardini, a 16-year-old girl who left her home in the Daraya suburb of Damascus with her family in 2013, went on to compete as a swimmer on the International Olympic Committee’ refugee team in the 2016 summer games.

Lina Shamy —“I Went to Syria to Study. I Left in a Refugee Convoy.”

An architect and activist tells her story of studying in Aleppo, protesting the Assad regime, and ultimately fleeing the country.

Ahmad and Mohamed al-Haj Ali —“Why Is It So Difficult for Syrian Refugees to Get Into the U.S.?”

Seventeen-year-old twin boys, their parents and sister left Syria in 2012, ultimately settling in Aurora, Illinois.

Abdul Hadi Nasurah —“Syrian Refugees on the War, Their Camp, and Your Questions”

A 23-year-old Syrian man is among several refugees and residents of Za’tari Camp in Jordan who share their experiences and opinions with a New York Times reporter during an interactive video conference. Viewers in the United States, Brazil and other countries pose questions and comments in real time via social media, and the refugees with whom the reporter speaks respond.

________

3. Connecting information to stories. Ask students to write answers to the questions on Handout 1.2: Connecting information to stories, focusing on the experience of the refugee whose story they read or watched. They should make inferences based on information from the story, from the other resources below, and any other reliable sources they can find.

If there is enough time remaining in the lesson, ask each group to share what they have learned. They should begin with an introduction to the story of the young Syrian they read or watched, and then present answers to the questions they found as they reviewed the sources provided (or others they found).

Teachers’ote: Students may not find answers to all of the questions in the sources they read or viewed. Support them in answering as many questions as they can, but allow them to leave some unanswered if they cannot find reliable information to make inferences.

_________

4. Writing “nquiry questions and idea statements” Write these questions on the board, and ask students to finish them in ways that reflect their own opinions and perspectives.

A. Learning about the experiences of people from Syria (and those in the communities that host them), the five most important facts I learned were …

i. ___

ii. ___

iii. ___

iv. ___

v. ___

B. Something unexpected or surprising I heard or learned today was ...

C. One challenge or one opportunity I have in common with some of the Syrian youth in these stories is …

D. One challenge or one opportunity I face that is different from those facing Syrian youth in these stories is …

E. If I could ask [name of Syrian person from one of the stories] a question in person, I would ask …

Students can write their statements and questions individually, or working together in their small groups. Then they can share some of their reflections with the class.

________

Additional Learning Network Resources

Text to Text: Comparing Jewish Refugees of the 1930s With Syrian Refugees Today

Analyzing Trump’ Immigration Ban: A Lesson Plan

Growing Up in a Time of Fear: Confronting Stereotypes About Muslims and Countering Xenophobia

Tragedy in the Mediterranean: Learning About Europe’ Immigration Crisis

Analyzing Maps to Better Understand Global Current Events and History

The \b ISIS\b0  Threat: Teaching About the Complex War Raging in Iraq and Syria

The Fog of War: Helping Students Make Sense of Syria

Hana Abdullah left her home in Mabrouka, a small Syrian town, in 2011 at the beginning of the Syrian civil war, and moved with her extended family to a makeshift tent settlement in Lebanon’ Bekaa Valley. This photograph was taken on August 1, 2015, when Hana was 12 years old. | Lynsey Addario for The New York Times Magazine | Nisreen al-Najjar’ son Hisham, center, at home in Jordan. Hisham has Type 1 diabetes. Related Article | Nadia Bseiso for The New York Times | Yusra Mardini, who will compete on the refugee team at the Rio Games, trained at the Wasserfreunde Spandau 04 club in Berlin. Related Article | Gordon Welters for The New York Times | The Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan is one of the largest Syrian camps in the world. In the fall, we visited the camp live with our audience. Here’ what we heard from the refugees and from you. | By DEBORAH ACOSTA 

Document NYTFEED020170426ed4q002ut
