Editorial
Opinion
A Syrian Plan Worth a Look

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
639 words
9 May 2017
20:18
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

After seven years and with some 400,000 people killed, almost any plan to end or reduce the carnage in Syria would be welcome. So the Trump administration would be derelict if it did not give serious consideration to the plan for a cease-fire and safe zones brokered by Russia, with the backing of Turkey and Iran.

But the plan contains considerable deficiencies, and President Trump could make the situation worse if he is too eager to make common cause with his erstwhile buddy, President Vladimir Putin of Russia, who cares most about securing his own legacy and Russian interests in the Middle East. Syria will be a main focus when Secretary of State Rex Tillerson meets Russia’ foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, in Washington on Wednesday.

Under the deal, which went into effect at midnight Friday, the three nations pledged to enforce a cease-fire between Syrian government and opposition forces in the Idlib province, a part of Homs province, the Ghouta suburbs of Damascus and parts of Syria’ southern provinces.

The plan would allow displaced or embattled Syrians to relocate to the designated safe areas, still held by rebels unaffiliated with the Islamic State, and enable aid deliveries to some 4.5 million people at risk. It also calls for all parties to fight jihadists like the Islamic State and the Qaeda-linked group once known as the Nusra Front.

Previous cease-fires have been short-lived. The new deal has led to reduced fighting, but hardly a cessation. On Sunday, the army of President Bashar al-Assad, whose government agreed to the cease-fire, seized control of the village of al-Zalakiyat north of Hama on Sunday, a war monitor reported.

Syrian opposition groups, mostly Sunni Muslims, some backed by the United States, rejected the deal because they have little faith that Russia and Iran can get Mr. Assad to fulfill his promise to halt the slaughter of civilians. And they object to the role of Iran, a Shiite Muslim nation that has a religious kinship with Mr. Assad’ Alawite sect.

It is not at all clear how Russia, Turkey and Iran will ensure compliance. The Russian negotiator at the talks, Aleksandr Lavrentyev, reportedly told Russian news outlets that Moscow could “ork more closely”ith countries that back the rebels, including the United States and Saudi Arabia. Other reports suggested that Russia, Turkey and Iran could send armed forces to secure the zones.

In Copenhagen on Monday for a meeting of the anti-ISIS coalition, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said the United States owes it to the Syrian people to take a close look at the deal but emphasized the many questions, including whether it could be effective.

Although President Trump raised the idea of safe zones during the campaign, the Pentagon has long been opposed because it could lead to a new commitment of American forces in a messy civil war.

Another major question is the impact of the agreement on the Syrian Kurds near the Turkish border who have been the most effective American allies in the fight against the Islamic State and whom the Pentagon is counting on to help take the ISIS stronghold of Raqqa.

Dividing Syria into government and rebel sectors, even temporarily, as this agreement does, is not ideal. The last thing the region needs is another fractured states. But after years of fruitless attempts to end the killing and forge a comprehensive political solution that would replace Mr. Assad with a more inclusive government, it may be the only way to stop the bloodshed.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter, and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Syrians in Daraa on Tuesday. | Mohamad Abazeed/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170509ed590070v
