World News:  ISIS  Loses Ground in Raqqa --- Old quarter of extremists' de facto capital in Syria falls; civilians suffer heavily

By Maria Abi-Habib and Nour Alakraa 
742 words
4 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

U.S.-backed Syrian forces retook the old city of Raqqa, U.S. officials said Sunday, inching closer to fully capturing what was once the extremist group's de facto capital used by militants to plan and stage attacks on the West.

With the advance into the old city, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by U.S. Special Forces, have taken about 60% of the city of Raqqa and are nearing some of the key infrastructure used by Islamic State that could provide important intelligence on the group.

The forces are now less than a mile from Islamic State's military barracks, religious courts and the main public square where the group declared its rule over Raqqa in 2014 and later conducted the public punishments that became the hallmark of its tyrannical rule.

"Another Milestone: #SDF in last 48 hrs complete liberation of #Raqqa's old city (longtime #ISIS stronghold) and evacuate 1000s of civilians," Brett McGurk, the U.S. president's special envoy in the battle against Islamic State, tweeted Sunday.

Despite the gains in Raqqa and across the border in Iraq in recent months, Islamic State still holds a significant amount of territory in Syria. The group moved its leaders and valued equipment to the eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour about a year ago.

The U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State and the Syrian regime's military are both slowly converging on Deir Ezzour to squeeze the extremists from the province, which borders Iraq and has some of Syria's largest oil fields.

In Iraq, the birthplace of the group, the militants have largely melted back into the population, U.S. and Iraqi officials say.

The Syrian Democratic Forces have led the battle for Raqqa as they have against Islamic State's other territories in Syria.

The mostly Kurdish force has some Arab fighters. But it has also been accused of numerous rights violations by human-rights groups and Arabs, such as forcing Arabs out of their homes to grab land for a semiautonomous state they aspire to build in northern Syria. The Kurds are an ethnic minority in Syria.

Some of the biggest losers in the fight against Islamic State have been civilians, with residents of Raqqa city reporting thousands wounded or killed by U.S.-led coalition airstrikes or caught in the crossfire ground fighting.

"The civilians are paying the highest price," said Uday, who is from Raqqa and is in touch with his family there but now lives in Turkey. He asked to be identified by his first name only as relatives still live under Islamic State rule.

The anti-Islamic State activist group Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently said Raqqa's civilians are facing hunger with food shortages while the water for an estimated 10,000 civilians still stuck in the city has been contaminated.

Airwars, a monitoring agency that assess the impact of international airstrikes, said Thursday that a minimum of 860 civilians, including some 150 children, are "credibly reported" to have been killed in Raqqa since the U.S.-backed forces launched their assault on the city in June.

The U.S.-led coalition has played down the numbers of civilians killed in its operations against Islamic State.

Islamic State fighters were also under pressure in a separate standoff in the desert of eastern Syria. A convoy with some 300 militants and their families who were allowed to evacuate a region on the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria last week remain trapped in the central province of Homs, just south of Deir Ezzour province where they intended to go.

Hezbollah and the Syrian government had brokered a deal for the extremists to leave the border region and go to Deir Ezzour in exchange for information on the whereabouts of nine Lebanese soldiers who were kidnapped by the group in 2014.

The convoy of 17 buses left the Lebanese border region last Tuesday and has languished just south of Deir Ezzour as U.S. airstrikes have prevented Islamic State from sending its troops to meet the convoy. The Pentagon harshly criticized the deal but the U.S.-led coalition has said it won't strike the convoy because of the presence of women and children aboard.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170904ed940001n
