World
U.S. Airstrikes on Syria Divide Middle East; Saudi Arabia and Israel cheer missile strikes; Iran condemns them

By Rory Jones in Tel Aviv, Margherita Stancati in Dubai and Aresu Eqbali in Tbilisi, Georgia 
780 words
7 April 2017
13:22
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Syria's staunchest foes in the Middle East—audi Arabia and Israel—heered the U.S. missile strikes on a Syrian air base early Friday, saying they sent a clear message that the international community wouldn't tolerate chemical weapons.

However, Iran, which is a key military and financial backer of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, condemned the attack as a move that would deepen the chaos in Syria and strengthen armed opposition groups.

"Tehran considers using this excuse to take unilateral measures dangerous, destructive and a violation of international laws," Iranian Foreign Ministry spokesman Bahram Ghasemi said, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency.

The U.S. military launched dozens of Tomahawk cruise missiles overnight against the Shayrat air base near the city of Homs in Syria, following this week's suspected chemical weapons attack on a rebel-held town. The U.S. strikes were intended to cripple the base's airfield and other infrastructure, and to indicate that the chemical attack was unacceptable to the U.S.

Saudi Arabia, which is an important ally of the Syrian antigovernment opposition, declared its full support for Washington's operation.

"The Syrian regime brought this military operation upon itself," said a statement attributed to a foreign ministry official and carried by the official Saudi Press Agency. "The brave decision taken by the U.S. president in response to these crimes should be hailed when the international community has been unable to put a stop to such actions by the Syrian regime."

Riyadh and other Gulf monarchies have long pushed for more decisive U.S. action against forces loyal to Mr. Assad, who is backed by Tehran—audi Arabia's rival for regional influence.

"Everyone was waiting for the U.S. to act against Bashar al-Assad," said Ibrahim al-Marie, a retired Saudi colonel and security analyst based in Riyadh. "The Trump administration is also saying: we will be a big player in Syria, not like the Obama administration."

For Iran, the strikes represent a blow and new challenge in a conflict that appeared to be tilting in its direction following Russia's decision to intervene militarily on behalf of Mr. Assad in late 2015.

Foad Izadi, a professor at Tehran University, said Iran wouldn't sit back as the tide turned against Mr. Assad, even if it wasn't yet clear how Tehran would respond.

Iran has sent hundreds of military advisers and proxy forces to fight alongside Mr. Assad, although it withdrew some of its own personnel in 2016 after suffering heavy losses.

"Iran and Russia have paid a high cost in Syria, both financially and in human life, and Iran has lost even more than Russia," Mr. Izadi said. "Therefore, Iran will not sit back indifferent."

Saudi Arabia had grown frustrated with former U.S. President Barack Obama's refusal to either increase support for Syrian rebels or strike Syrian government forces, particularly after Mr. Assad used chemical weapons in a 2013 attack that left 1,400 people dead in Damascus.

A more muscular U.S. approach in Syria could strengthen the rebel position in possible political negotiations aimed at ending the conflict.

"This limited operation will make the regime more flexible," Mr. Marie said.

Israeli Prime Minister  Benjamin Netanyahu  said the strikes sent a "strong and clear message" that the use and proliferation of chemical weapons wouldn't be tolerated. ​t the time of the 2013 attack, Israeli officials accused Mr. Obama's administration of being too weak in responding.

The U.S. informed Israel of Friday's strikes ahead of time, an Israeli official said.

"Israel fully supports President Trump's decision and hopes that this message of resolve in the face of the Assad regime's horrific actions will resonate not only in Damascus, but in Tehran, Pyongyang and elsewhere," Mr. Netanyahu said.

Asa Fitch in Dubai contributed to this article.

Write to Rory Jones at rory.jones@wsj.com and Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message

* Strike Shakes Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Trump Didn't Have to Contemplate a Power Vacuum in Damascus

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* How the Trump Administration's Language Shifted Quickly on Assad

* Congress Supports U.S. Airstrikes Against Syria, Debates What Happens Next

* Trump Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

* President Trump's Syria Statement

Document WSJO000020170407ed47001jl
