Markets
Pullback on Wall Street Rules | Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers | Fiduciary Rule Casualty | Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances; The Wall Street Journal's financial regulation newsletter for Monday, August 14, 2017.

7,958 words
14 August 2017
13:39
WSJ Pro Financial Regulation
RSTPROFR
English
Copyright ©017, Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Federal Housing Finance Agency chief Mel Watt has warned for months that he might order Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to build up cash buffers to insulate themselves against future losses. He recently indicated he's still looking for political cover to follow through with his plan.

Mr. Watt is facing a "damned if you do, damned if you don't" situation that has no easy answers.

At issue are the mortgage-finance giants' ultra-thin capital levels, which will drop to zero in January under the terms of their federal bailouts. As a result, should the companies suffer an operating loss, they would have no capital to absorb it and would be forced to draw on their $258 billion government backstop. That would be interpreted as yet another bailout for the companies and, according to Mr. Watt, could trigger "adverse" market consequences.

To avoid that scenario, Mr. Watt has said he might order the companies to retain earnings rather than to continue sending them to the Treasury Department (as they currently do under the terms of their bailouts). But so far he's received no political support from the Trump administration or key congressional Republicans to make such a change.

(Meanwhile, the companies signaled earlier this month that they might not make their quarterly dividend payment to Treasury at the end of September— move that could divert about $5 billion from federal coffers just as the government's debt ceiling needs to be raised.)

Mr. Watt seems now to acknowledge he's stuck: He wants to order the companies to begin to build up their capital buffers, but there are significant political pitfalls for doing do.

"I have publicly expressed my concerns that the declining capital buffers leave the enterprises with little or no ability to absorb losses," he wrote the National Association of Realtors last week. "However, I am sensitive to the prospect that whatever steps FHFA could take might be misperceived as either an effort to promote recapitalization and release of the enterprises [from government control] or as interference with Congress's important work to advance housing finance reform."

To be sure, Mr. Watt didn't rule out eventually requiring the companies to retain their profits, but his letter suggests he is eager to see some political momentum to back such a move, saying he will "continue to look for ways to ensure that the concerns I have expressed are addressed constructively."

Mr. Watt is an Obama-administration appointee whose term expires in January 2019.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Watt declined to comment on the letter, which came in response to a Realtor-backed plan to allow the mortgage-finance firms to begin retaining some of their profits while Congress deliberates on how to refashion them. The National Association of Realtors says allowing the companies to retain some of their earnings would create a buffer between any losses and taxpayers, who would be on the hook should the companies need to draw on their Treasury backstop.

William Brown, the group's president, said in a written statement that his members "appreciate" Mr. Watt's attention to the issue.

Key Developments in Washington, on Wall Street, and Beyond

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

By Ryan Tracy and Dave Michaels

Efforts toward financial deregulation are beginning to take concrete shape on rules governing trading desks, bank boardrooms, corporations' financial disclosures and more. Nearly seven months into the Trump administration, regulators are setting the stage for a wave of eased rules.

Several agencies are reviewing the Volcker rule, a part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act that limits banks' trading. Some regulators also recently dropped a plan to restrict bonuses on Wall Street that had been opposed by banks and brokerage firms. And the Labor Department on Wednesday disclosed an 18-month delay in the so-called fiduciary rule that requires brokers to act in retirement savers' best interests rather than their own.

The moves show that while President Donald Trump is struggling to advance his legislative agenda in Congress, his administration has begun laying the groundwork to change some of the myriad rules that Wall Street has sought for years to overturn or water down.

"On most topics, we are still awaiting the approval of appointees, but it is encouraging that there are some issues, some of which are technical but incredibly important to running a bank, where some progress is being made," said Greg Baer, president of the Clearing House Association of large banks.

"It is a time to…etermine where the pendulum has gone too far," Craig Phillips, counselor to U.S. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, told a government-advisory committee July 20 at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Mr. Phillips, a former investment banker and senior executive at BlackRock Inc., has been leading the administration's effort to identify changes to financial rules. He was a principal author of a Treasury Department report released in June that recommended 97 policies in the lending sector for Congress and regulators to re-examine. More reports are coming, covering other sectors.

So far, the rule book for Wall Street hasn't been rewritten in major ways, in part because nominees for some key posts haven't been named or are awaiting Senate confirmation. But officials who are in place are laying the groundwork.

Those efforts are triggering pushback about whether they would undermine protections adopted after the 2008 bank bailouts. Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown, the top Democrat on the Senate Banking Committee, has said many of the proposals amount to "weakening or eliminating important safeguards."

"Big banks are making record profits, yet they claim they're besieged by their watchdogs," he said last month.

Mr. Baer calls the changes under consideration "an effort to rethink things in a cogent way."

Partisan tensions on Capitol Hill will make it difficult to make changes through legislation, meaning some items on the industry's wish list, such as full repeal of the Volcker rule, are unlikely. But that inertia doesn't restrict agency officials, who typically have broad discretion on how to implement rules that stem from legislation Congress has passed.

The current regulatory agenda of the Securities and Exchange Commission, published in July, removed more than a dozen proposals related to Dodd-Frank, including the plan to restrict bonuses.

The commission's Trump-nominated chairman, Jay Clayton, has said he wants to lighten the regulatory burden on public companies, which are required to make public filings to keep shareholders informed about financial performance, business trends and potential risks.

He hasn't taken action to scale back those rules yet, but his predecessor Michael Piwowar, a Republican SEC commissioner tapped by Mr. Trump to serve as acting chairman until Mr. Clayton was confirmed, started work toward changing two rules. One requires disclosure of the pay gap between chief executives and workers, and another requires companies to investigate whether their products include minerals from African countries where mining can benefit armed groups. Any significant changes to the rules would require an opportunity for public comment and a commission vote.

Mr. Clayton, in remarks last month to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, also questioned whether small shareholders are abusing an election process that allows them to seek changes to corporate bylaws.

A more radical SEC step under study is how to revise the rules for who can invest in private companies. U.S. law allows companies to issue stock with little regulatory oversight as long as all investors qualify as wealthy or sophisticated enough to understand the risk or withstand potential losses. But Mr. Piwowar has questioned the restriction, saying it walls off sought-after investments for the rich.

The SEC and the four other federal agencies that wrote the Volcker rule agreed in recent weeks to give banks leeway on aspects of the regulation while beginning private discussions about how to rewrite it.

The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the chief agency that regulates federally chartered banks and which is temporarily led by a Trump appointee, took the first tangible step toward potentially rewriting the rule when it reopened it for comments from the public.

In early August, the Senate confirmed three of Mr. Trump's nominees to the U.S. derivatives regulator, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, including Chairman J. Christopher Giancarlo. That representation will strengthen the commission's ability to carry out Mr. Giancarlo's desired revamp of postcrisis rules governing the swaps market.

Mr. Trump in July announced his pick for the vacant job of Federal Reserve vice chairman in charge of bank oversight. The nominee, financier and former Treasury Department official Randal Quarles, has said he would support reviews of the Volcker rule as well as the central bank's annual stress tests of large banks.

Staffers at the Fed already are taking a fresh look at a bank-capital rule known as the leverage ratio, a move long sought by the largest U.S. banks, according to people familiar with the matter.

And the Fed in August proposed scaling back requirements it places on banks' boards of directors, after determining it was overloading boards with too many specific requirements.

Not all the action is deregulatory. The new CFTC commissioners recently vowed to finish a position-limits rule to limit speculation in commodity markets, a regulation mandated by Dodd-Frank.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, still led by an Obama appointee, in early July restricted mandatory arbitration in financial contracts, making it easier for consumers to sue financial companies. That rule won't last if enough Republicans in the Senate vote to repeal it in the coming weeks.

—abriel T. Rubin contributed to this article.

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

By Sam Goldfarb

Investors are snapping up a new type of security sold by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, increasingly assuming the risks of mortgage defaults from taxpayers and powering a quiet transformation of the housing giants after almost a decade of government control.

Fannie and Freddie have sold roughly $48 billion of the securities since 2013 to a broadening group of buyers including asset managers and insurance companies. Sales are expected to reach a fresh high of $15 billion this year, up from the previous record $13 billion last year, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.

The sales mark an early step toward reducing the government's role in the $14.4 trillion U.S. mortgage market. The amount of mortgage debt funneled through Fannie and Freddie and other taxpayer-backed entities roughly doubled after the financial crisis, to around 70%.

The progress has come despite a long-running stalemate in Congress, which has stumbled in its effort to design a replacement for the decades-old housing-finance system that centers on Fannie and Freddie.

It may not be happening as people anticipated, but "the government's footprint in the mortgage market is receding quickly and significantly," said Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics.

The market for the so-called credit-risk transfers has boomed even as the one for privately issued mortgage-backed securities has remained mostly dormant, a sign that investors have greater comfort in the standards and transparency of these deals than in those issued by Wall Street banks that performed so poorly after the housing bust.

Fannie and Freddie don't make loans. They buy them from lenders and bundle them into securities. Those bonds typically carry a guarantee that Fannie and Freddie will pay investors if underlying mortgages default, leaving investors only with the risk that the bonds will lose value if interest rates rise.

The credit-risk transfers don't carry that guarantee. Nevertheless, they have proved popular with investors, who have concluded that the yields they offer are worth the added risk. As the market has developed, banks have also been willing to trade them, easing concerns that they would need to offer premium yields because they would be difficult for buyers to offload.

Reflecting the strong interest, the average yield that investors have demanded to hold one version of the instrument has fallen by more than half in just two years, to roughly 1.5 percentage points on top of a benchmark floating interest rate, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.

The pool of investors buying the securities is also widening to what many consider more stable sources of capital, a sign of their changing status. While hedge funds made up the largest group of early investors, that distinction now belongs to more traditional money managers, according to J.P. Morgan Securities. Though still small players in the market, insurance companies and real-estate investment trusts have also increased their buying in some recent deals.

Gene Tannuzzo, senior portfolio manager at Columbia Threadneedle, said he bought both Fannie and Freddie risk-transfers for the firm's Strategic Income Fund and then sold them as the market rallied.

"Liquidity has definitely improved as more securities have been issued," he said.

The mortgage giants are transferring risk on the loans most likely to default—hose of more than 20 years where homeowners have made less than a 40% down payment. Last year such mortgages accounted for 60% of all single-family mortgages they acquired, according to the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees the firms.

How much risk Fannie and Freddie have shed depends in part on the severity of defaults. In a normal economic expansion, investors would likely shoulder around 20% of the losses in the mortgages underlying the securities, according to a new report by Moody's Analytics.

But that number would jump to around 60% to 70% if there was another severe recession comparable to the last one—nough, if the firms were private, to possibly avoid a federal bailout, according to the Moody's report, which was written by analysts including Mr. Zandi.

The variability is a result of the securities' structure. Each comprises several tranches, linked to a pool of mortgages, with losses from defaults hitting the bottom tranche first and the top tranche last.

On almost all securities, Fannie and Freddie still own the riskiest and the safest tranches, seeing it as uneconomical to sell them to investors. That means they are exposed to mild losses, largely shielded from moderate to severe losses, but vulnerable again once defaults reach a catastrophic level.

The securities are one part of a larger government effort to revamp the housing giants. Since being placed under conservatorship in 2008—hen then-Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson said the government had a responsibility to address their systemic risk—he firms have adopted a more stable business model by shrinking their once massive investment portfolios and raising the fees they charge lenders to guarantee mortgages. They have also joined forces to build a common system for securitizing home loans that could ultimately be used by other firms.

The securities aren't without controversy. Some observers have expressed concerns that Fannie and Freddie are paying investors too much for the risk they're shedding. Investors could also demand sharply higher yields in a market downturn, forcing Fannie and Freddie to either stop selling the securities, increasing their exposure to future defaults, or raise fees they charge lenders, potentially making home loans more expensive.

The securities have been also been drawn into a larger debate about what the government should do with Fannie and Freddie, which stand in limbo between the public and private sectors—ending nearly all of their profits to the U.S. Treasury despite reporting quarterly earnings and having outstanding shares.

Some of the securities' strongest advocates include those who want the companies to be dismantled, replaced with a larger number of private firms or a single, government-run utility, which they say would disperse risk and avoid another taxpayer-funded bailout.

Many shareholders, however, want to preserve the companies in near their current form while releasing them from conservatorship. One group has funded a proposal that would provide incentives for the institutions to issue risk transfers without mandating them.

Risk-transfers are a useful tool, said Landon Parsons, a senior adviser at Moelis & Company, which created the plan, but they "may not be available during a business cycle downturn at a reasonable cost."

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

By Daisy Maxey

Is less more when it comes to investor choice? That's the question facing brokerage firms and investment advisers as they look to comply with a landmark retirement-savings rule.

Large brokerage firms typically offer thousands of mutual funds to clients. But compliance demands of the fiduciary rule, which began to take effect in June and requires stewards of tax-advantaged retirement savings to act in clients' best interests rather than their own, are causing some firms to review their offerings.

Conducting the due diligence and documentation required on so many investments can be onerous, and under the rule, some firms may face increased litigation risks. As a result, brokerages may remove some funds—ncluding those with higher fees or those that present perceived risks—rom their sales platforms.

"If you have more than 5,000 mutual funds on your platform, that oversight is a lot of work," said Alma Piscitello, executive vice president of Northern Lights Distributors, which provides underwriting services and counsels investment managers on fund distribution.

Some brokerage and advisory firms have already told Northern Lights of funds being pulled from brokerage platforms because of the fiduciary rule, generally because of size or expense, Ms. Piscitello said.

Under the Obama-era regulation, which aims to eliminate conflicted advice that can arise based on incentives to sell financial products, those offering financial advice to retirement savers may earn commissions and compensation that might give them an incentive to recommend one product over another, but must do so under an exemption. For advisers who use the exemption, any fees must be level with similar investment products or services. That has put mutual funds, with their varying share classes and costs, under the spotlight.

Advocates of the rule say weeding out high-cost or risky funds would benefit investors. But some managers fear the fund review will cause sales of their products to suffer and that fund expenses may be used as the key metric in the process, while financial advisers worry that funds they've used in clients' portfolios for years will be discontinued.

USA Financial hasn't cut any funds from its brokerage platform, but the Michigan-based financial-services firm has vetted its investment offerings with the fiduciary rule in mind, said Matt McGrew, the firm's chief operations officer.

If nothing changes and the rule takes full effect in January as planned, USA Financial anticipates cutting its more than 350 sales agreements across mutual funds, variable annuities, alternative investment and asset managers to "well less than 150," Mr. McGrew said.

But the rule remains in flux, with the Labor Department on Wednesday proposing to delay the compliance deadline by 18 months, which experts say suggests the rule still may undergo significant revisions.

Mark Travis, president and chief executive of Intrepid Capital Management in Jacksonville Beach, Fla., said some advisers who have sold his funds for years told him recently their firms plan to stop. Clients who already have money invested in Intrepid's funds will be able to stay invested, the advisers said, but no new money will be allowed on some brokerage platforms after the rule takes full effect.

Mr. Travis said one adviser is pushing back, telling his home office that he wants to continue offering Intrepid's funds as portfolio protection for clients. But, Mr. Travis said, the adviser has been told to have "a plan B" ready.

Investor shares of Intrepid's flagship $421.9 million Intrepid Capital Fund have an expense ratio of 1.4% compared with 0.91% for the median fund in its category, according to Morningstar Inc.

"That's a significant fee hurdle," said Jason Kephart, a senior analyst at Morningstar. Still, the fund's long-term performance has been solid, he added. The fund, which focuses on protecting investors' capital, lost just 16.7% in 2008 during the financial crisis as its average peer shed 28%.

Among bigger brokerages cutting fund offerings, some cite the fiduciary rule as impetus while others say it's simply part of regular due diligence.

LPL Financial said it plans to launch a new mutual-fund platform early next year to standardize advisers' compensation to comply with the rule. The platform will offer fewer fund families than its existing platform and limit upfront commissions and trailing fees, or annual commissions.

Bank of America Corp.'s Merrill Lynch unit last year trimmed its mutual-fund offerings to 2,200 from 3,500, and expects to cut that number to 1,800 by year's end. The move is part of an enhanced due-diligence process and regular evaluation of its lineup, and not related to the fiduciary rule, a spokeswoman said.

Advisers who are using funds that have been cut from fee-based accounts can keep their existing positions, the spokeswoman said, but must do so within commission-based accounts and won't be permitted to add new assets.

To comply with the fiduciary rule, Merrill has shifted to fee-based retirement accounts with some limited exceptions.

Advocates of the rule had hoped it would lead to a re-evaluation of investment offerings. The Obama administration said its goal in pursuing the rule was to protect unwitting individual investors from conflicted advice, which it said costs American families billions of dollars a year and pushes down annual returns on their retirement savings.

"It was always a feature of this rule that it was going to force investment products to compete under a best-interest standard instead of competing to be sold by paying the broker more generously," said Barbara Roper, director of investor protection at the Consumer Federation of America. "Forcing investment products to compete based on cost and quality will be best for investors, even if every decision made in narrowing these fund menus doesn't optimize the outcome."

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

By Dave Michaels

WASHINGTON—ne of the highest-paying jobs in regulating Wall Street is about to be open—nd the boss is taking applications.

U.S. officials are looking to hire a new chairman of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, a little-known body that oversees the country's largest accounting firms and their audits of public companies and broker-dealers, according to a statement issued Friday. The role, created by the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley law, pays more than $670,000 a year.

The PCAOB, as it is known, is a nonprofit regulator that is overseen by the Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC's commissioners also pick the audit regulator's chairman and other members of its board. The term of the current chairman, James Doty, expired in October 2015, but he stayed in the role because SEC commissioners didn't act to replace him.

The SEC's announcement said it is seeking a successor to Mr. Doty, indicating he won't be reappointed. Mr. Doty has led the body since 2011 and sometimes clashed with the biggest audit firms over proposals that sought to shine more light on the behind-the-scenes work of auditors. In June, for instance, the accounting board approved a rule that requires auditors to disclose more about any "critical audit matters"—reas of their audit that were especially challenging or complex or forced them to make tough decisions in evaluating a company's books.

Congress set relatively lofty salaries for the audit regulator's board members to attract qualified candidates from the legal and accounting fields. Board members at the agency make about $546,000 a year.

Seats on the audit regulator are especially attractive to lawyers and accountants in Washington, D.C., who have toiled at government agencies where they earn far less.

Mr. Doty had a mixed record as chairman. Business groups sometimes complained his inspectors were too tough on audit firms. He was also forced several years ago to retreat from an idea to make companies rotate their auditors after several years.

The SEC briefly considered replacing Mr. Doty in September 2015, just before his term expired. At the time, the candidates for the job included William Duhnke, a top Republican staff member on the Senate Banking Committee. Mr. Duhnke is now staff director of the Senate Rules and Administration Committee, according to LegiStorm, a Congress-focused research firm. He couldn't immediately be reached for comment.

The SEC said it is accepting applications for two other board seats on the PCAOB because a current member's term has expired and another's will end in October. Candidates interested in any of the roles should apply by Sept. 1, the SEC said.

China's State Firms Make Room for the Communist Party on Their Boards

By Gregor Stuart Hunter and Steven Russolillo

A push to establish the Communist Party in Chinese state enterprises is rolling through Hong Kong, raising corporate-governance concerns in one of the year's best-performing stock markets.

Since 2016, at least 32 Chinese state-owned companies or units listed in Hong Kong have proposed changes to their corporate structures to install Communist Party committees that advise their boards of directors. The moves, most coming in recent months, are prompting questions from market participants about who holds power at these companies, and whether they will be run for the benefit of investors.

The changes follow directives from Beijing, which has been pushing to establish the Communist Party's role in corporate charters on the mainland. They make explicit what many had already assumed: that China's ruling party—he country's sole governing authority despite the existence of several other political parties—eeps a tight grip on the country's state-owned firms. Those firms now make up the bulk of Hong Kong's market.

For the past two decades, Beijing has listed the stocks and bonds of its state-owned enterprises in Hong Kong—he offshore finance center with a separate business-friendly legal system—s a means of raising capital from global investors to fuel China's economic expansion.

The companies now placing their boards under Party guidance include some of the biggest listed in Hong Kong, with a combined market capitalization of 9.7 trillion Hong Kong dollars—lmost a third of the total value of stocks listed on the city's exchange.

They include China's biggest bank, Industrial & Commercial Bank of China, its largest brokerage, Citic Securities, and oil-and-gas giant China Petroleum & Chemical Corp., better known as Sinopec.

Many of the companies have passed amendments to their corporate structures and others are being put to shareholder vote in the next few weeks.

"When making decisions on significant matters, the Board shall seek advice from the Party committee of the Company," reads the amended article of association of Beijing-based engineering contractor China Machinery Engineering Corp.

Not all big state-owned enterprises have changed their charters. PetroChina Co., the listed unit of China's biggest oil company, whose shares trade in Shanghai, Hong Kong and New York, hasn't done so. PetroChina declined to comment.

So far, the Hong Kong stock market has largely ignored the moves, with the benchmark Hang Seng Index up 22% this year and hovering near a two-year high.

The stocks and bonds those companies issue comprise a major chunk of some benchmarks widely used by global investors, such as the MSCI Emerging Markets Index. The development is making some fund managers uneasy.

These latest disclosures provide "more questions than answers," said Jamie Grant, head of Asia fixed income at First State Investments. Mr. Grant said his firm has been assessing whether the changes affect the value of some of their stock and bond portfolios, since they noticed the amendments quietly being implemented this summer.

If the changes reflect an advance in Chinese President Xi Jinping's corruption crackdown, they may ultimately benefit investors, Mr. Grant said. Alternatively, they could be part of an attempt by the Communist Party to curb high debt levels, he added.

Outspoken private investor and former Hong Kong stock exchange director David Webb is more critical.

Making the Communist Party's role official provides companies "with cover to follow party instructions and reduces the chance that they will prioritize shareholder value," Mr. Webb wrote in an email. "It underlines the falsity of [Chinese] leaders' claims to be ‘etting market forces play a greater role' and ‘eepening reforms.'"

None of the Chinese companies that disclosed these changes responded to requests for comment. The Chinese body that oversees state enterprises, State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission, or SASAC, wasn't available to comment.

The amendments underscore the growing dominance of mainland companies and capital in Hong Kong. Mainland investors have flooded into Hong Kong's property market and are buying up an increasing proportion of the stock market via new trading links with Shanghai and Shenzhen.

Chinese government agencies have also blocked accountancy firms in Hong Kong from producing mainland-company documents that have been requested by regulators in other countries, citing national secrecy concerns.

President Xi Jinping is pushing the Communist Party to take a more visible leadership role in society, with state-owned enterprises at the forefront. Two years ago, the government called for "strengthened Party leadership and improved corporate governance" and to enshrine the Party's role in corporate charters.

SASAC ordered state firms under central government control to make the changes by June end, while local governments are giving companies they control until the end of the year to comply.

The push has accelerated since April, Hong Kong and Shanghai exchange filings indicate. Several of the Hong Kong-listed companies that have mandated the creation of Communist Party committees said their boards would take into account the opinions of those committees "before making decisions on major matters." Some stated that the chairman of the board and the secretary of the Party committee should be the same person. Many of the companies also established disciplinary committees to police corruption.

China Aluminum International Engineering Corp. stated in its amended articles of association that its Communist Party committee would help create "an effective system under which no one dares to, or can be corrupted, or thinks of committing corruption."

One portfolio manager at a global investment firm expressed concern about the involvement of Party members in the corporate decision-making process, particularly since they might not have the best interests of the company or its shareholders in mind. Valuations could suffer as a result, he said.

As a group, the 32 companies that have allowed the Communist party greater influence currently are valued roughly 24% cheaper than the Hang Seng Index.

But shareholders of state companies who object to the increased Communist Party influence can't do much about it. Most state-owned enterprises are majority-owned by Beijing, which has enough voting rights to force through the changes.

Hong Kong's market regulator, the Securities and Futures Commission, declined to comment on the trend.

A spokeswoman for Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing, the city's stock market operator, said the Chinese state firms were following listing rules, though it had noted some "minor variations" in their articles of association.

—anfan Wang and Yifan Xie contributed to this article.

Ex-Trader Seeks Redemption for ‘ntellectual Grift'

By Matt Wirz

"God it smells like dead animal in here," says Chris Arnade, a former bond trader, as he opens the doors of his battered minivan in an attempt to clear the baked-in stink.

It's 105 degrees in the parking lot of a Bakersfield, Calif., McDonald's on a recent Saturday. Homeless men and women pass by on their way to get breakfast, free ice or to sit in the air conditioning.

Mr. Arnade walked away from Wall Street after 20 years to photograph and write about America's disaffected poor. His work, especially on how economic inequality contributed to Donald Trump's political ascent, has garnered a large following of fans—nd detractors—cross the political spectrum.

Mr. Arnade's unusual bipartisan appeal—oth Arkansas Republican Sen. Tom Cotton and billionaire Democratic fundraiser Chris Sacca invited him to lunch this spring—eflects the contradictions of a life spent straddling social and economic divides.

He grew up lower middle class in the rural south, where his family stuck out for its civil rights activism. He made millions on Wall Street from what he calls "intellectual grift," while spending his days arguing for liberal economic changes with conservative co-workers.

The 52-year-old Mr. Arnade says the new career is a conscious attempt to reconcile his multiple identities, and perhaps atone for his time in finance.

"This is more comfortable to me," he says, waving his hand at the foot traffic around the Bakersfield McDonald's. "This is what I grew up with."

Tall and unshaven with shoulder-length graying hair, Mr. Arnade has swapped his trader's khakis and button-down shirts for jeans and T-shirts, usually worn several days in a row. He radiates frenetic energy, walking everywhere at a rapid clip and conversing in a hopscotch that jumps from one topic to another.

Most nights on the road he sleeps in the van or at cut-rate motels. He woke to yelling on a recent night at a Bakersfield Days Inn and found police officers investigating a murder across the hall.

"I peeked into the room and there was a lot of blood," Mr. Arnade says. "Then I went back to bed."

The journey from bond trader to the Bakersfield parking lot began in a ramshackle house in San Antonio, Fla. Mr. Arnade's father, a Jewish university professor who escaped Nazi Germany, and mother, a socialist activist, raised him and six siblings in the conservative, Catholic town.

There he played high-school football and baseball and learned to shoot guns. But he was also teased for his bookishness and called a "n—over," he says. His parents skimped on new clothes and car repairs so they could take the family on far-flung academic research trips and all of the children went to college, a rarity in San Antonio at the time, he says.

"Being caught in the middle you end up something of a watcher," says Mr. Arnade. "You never fit in entirely."

He also felt like an outsider on Wall Street, where he landed in 1993 after receiving a doctorate in particle physics from Johns Hopkins University, borrowing money to buy the suit he needed for his interview with Salomon Smith Barney.

"He was very rural Florida and different from anyone else we were working with, these lacrosse players who grew up well off in the suburbs," says Jeff Lox, a former colleague of Mr. Arnade.

Financial analysis came easy to him, Mr. Arnade says, and he enjoyed the problem-solving aspects of his job trading emerging-market bonds, a then-nascent industry. He traveled to countries such as Brazil and Argentina and enjoyed perks like getting a table at sushi restaurant Nobu without reservations.

"When you talk about grey matter, Chris clearly had that," says Stephen Dizard, Mr. Arnade's boss during his early years trading emerging-market bonds.

As he climbed the ranks, Mr. Arnade frequently argued politics with other traders, most of who leaned toward the "libertarian wing of the Republican party," says Peter Besold, a former co-worker who now trades for hedge fund Millennium Management.

He moved in 2006 to Citigroup Inc.'s proprietary trading desk, where he wagered as much as $100 million on single trades in government bonds and currencies. The move boosted his stress. "I used to wake up some mornings and have to vomit," he says.

Mr. Arnade lost money in the 2008 financial crisis—is only down year in two decades—ut that wasn't what turned him off trading.

"The thing that got to him was hearing [traders] who had lost millions and gotten bailed out complaining that Obamacare raised their taxes," Mr. Lox says.

While Mr. Arnade grew angry at co-workers, he also wondered what they might accomplish if they quit finance to tackle economic and political issues. "One thing about banking, the people are smart and good at solving problems," he says. "It's such a waste."

Mr. Arnade says he stayed on Wall Street so long because he and his family grew accustomed to their affluent lifestyle in Brooklyn, including private schools and luxury vacations. "I stuck it out as much by inertia as anything else," he says. To escape, he took half-day walks through New York photographing immigrant and poor communities.

A turning point came in 2012 when Citigroup shut down Mr. Arnade's proprietary trading desk because of new bank regulation. Around the same time, his mother died of pancreatic cancer.

"Let's just say I don't think my mom ever approved of my career," he says.

He decided to quit finance and focus on photo essays, starting with addicts and prostitutes he had befriended on walks in the Bronx.

The move caused anxiety at home. "I'm not the clingy type but there's a panic about ‘here's the money going to come from?'" said Valerie Arnade, Mr. Arnade's wife. The family cut expenses by relocating to a house in New Paltz, a college town in the Hudson Valley.

Mr. Arnade declined to disclose specifically how much money he made on Wall Street but says he saved enough to put his three children through college and maintain his family's new lifestyle.

He spent several years working on the streets, in squats and in rehabs getting to know his subjects for the series, which has been viewed about 1.5 million times on Flickr. Mrs. Arnade became his editor, catching mistakes and offering feedback on his writing, a partnership that continues today.

Some attacked his work on social media, calling it exploitative, and Mr. Arnade grew nostalgic for the arguments he used to have on Wall Street. "Everybody I ever dealt with on the trading floor would acknowledge when they were wrong," he says. "That doesn't happen on Twitter."

He began reporting for newspapers and magazines and in late 2014 started traveling to towns across the country with high rates of poverty and drug addiction. He met residents on the street, in churches and mosques, community colleges and McDonald's franchises. Many felt abandoned economically and angry enough about Wall Street bailouts to support Mr. Trump.

He began to question the quantitative approach to problems he developed as a physicist and trader. "I've come to understand the value of thinking emotionally," Mr. Arnade says. "Thinking about things rationally through numbers is very confining."

Driving through Bakersfield's dilapidated downtown, Mr. Arnade pulls over to speak to Ruth Tate, an 87-year-old African-American woman sweeping her sidewalk in the heat. She tells him about her move from Mississippi 50 years ago, her late husband's passing, her disappointment in how the U.S. is "going down the drain."

He listens, then asks, "I don't mean to make you uncomfortable but, is the racism bad here? Who did you vote for in the election?" She avoids the first question, then reluctantly says she voted for Mr. Trump.

WSJ Pro: Market Talk: Daily Analysis Roundup

Kashkari: Wells Fargo Needs to Hold People Accountable

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis President Neel Kashkari, pointing to press reports about a shake-up at Wells Fargo's (WFC) board of directors, says the San Francisco-based bank needs to hold people in the bank accountable for its scandals. "What we all saw happening at Wells Fargo is totally unacceptable," Kashkari says, in response to a question at a town hall event about the scandals involving the bank's sales practices. "We need to hold people accountable for their actions," he says. (shayndi.raice@wsj.com)

Annual Executive Pay Votes Get Investor Backing

Shareholders will get a more frequent say on executive pay issues at 146 companies in the Russell 3000, an investor group says. Public-companies generally hold an advisory vote on executive pay structures every one to three years, with shareholders getting a say in the frequency. The investor group—ncluding New York state's comptroller, the AFL-CIO's investment arm and consultant Segal Marco Advisors—dentified 319 companies with triennial votes; 273 this year considered switching to an annual vote and just 127 stuck with the longer interval. At 37 firms, a shareholder majority favored annual votes despite management's opposition. (theo.francis@wsj.com; @theofrancis)

Cost Cuts Still Crucial for Clientis's Credit

Swiss regional banking service firm Clientis may be expanding its services for third-party banks, which is positive, but the most important factor in terms of credit quality is still tight cost control, Vontobel analyst Gerhard von Stockum says in a note. The bank has an A- shadow rating on Clientis, which reported resilient 1H numbers in a "still very challenging" interest rate environment. Clientis has two Swiss franc bonds outstanding that mature in 2018 and 2022, based on Factset data. (tasos.vossos@wsj.com, @tasosvos)

Chinese Lenders Seen Delivering Consensus Beating 1H

The tide might be turning for Chinese banking stocks, which have been underperforming the broader market for long. Credit Suisse expects Chinese lenders' 1H earnings to beat market consensus on higher credit growth and improving loan portfolio. Net interest margins of Chinese lenders continue to expand and their lending growth remains high as the nation's economy stays robust in 1H, it says. Big H-share banks are a bargain as their valuation is the cheapest among all sectors, it adds, and that the A/H premium is back to the level of early 2016, making them a southbound investors' darling. (joanne.chiu@wsj.com; @joannechiuhk)

Last Excuse for Thin Spreads on U.S. Junk Bonds Gone

The last indicator supporting extraordinarily thin spreads in U.S. speculative-grade bonds—he ultra-low CBOE Volatility index—s no more. And unless the VIX drops below the latest readings of 16 points, junk bond spreads will soon surpass 400 basis points, says John Lonski, chief economist at Moody's Capital Markets Research. Spreads currently trade at around 390 bps. Models, based only on the expected default frequency, point to spreads between 443 bps and 517 bps, while the VIX is in line with spreads of 452 bps, Mr. Lonski adds. (tasos.vossos@wsj.com, @tasosvos)

FEATURED GRAPHIC

Six Financial-Regulation Issues and Where They Stand

The Trump administration and the Republican-led Congress have argued for rolling back postcrisis financial regulations, a move they say would help spur economic growth. So far, many rules remain in place, but officials are beginning the work of undoing them. Here's a look at the state of play on six big issues in financial regulation nearly seven months into the Trump administration.

Bitcoin Soars Past $4,000 in Weekend Trading

The price of the digital currency bitcoin crossed over the $4,000 mark for the first time in its nine-year history, despite a widespread selloff in other major digital currencies.

Bitcoin was trading Sunday morning near $4,033, according to the news and research site CoinDesk, up 3.1% on the day, and up more than 25% in August. The price, which rose as high as $4,200 Sunday morning, has more than quadrupled so far this year.

Unlike stocks and other traditional assets that trade on exchanges with set hours, bitcoin trades electronically 24-hours a day and during weekends. The gains Saturday and Sunday seemed to be coming at the expense of other digital currencies, many of which have been issued just this year in a developing trend called "initial coin offerings."

Latest Hot Digital Coin Offering: $187 Million in One Hour for Filecoin

Delaying Fiduciary Rule Costs Savers Billions

The Labor Department's proposed 18-month delay of the compliance date for the fiduciary rule "would be enormously expensive to retirement savers," according to an analysis by the Economic Policy Institute. The left-leaning Washington think tank estimates the delay will cost retirement savers $10.9 billion over the next 30 years. "We look over a 30 year horizon because if there is a delay, losses to retirement investors persist and compound long after the delay ends," the institute writes.

A Link Between Gambling and Financial Misreporting

Companies based in areas where residents hold gambling-friendly attitudes are more likely to intentionally misreport financial information, researchers found. Intentional financial-misreporting rates were 50% higher in areas where gambling is more accepted by the majority of residents, according to Dane Christensen, a University of Oregon professor and one of three co-authors of the research which has been accepted for publication in the journal Contemporary Accounting Research. "We wanted to know what attitudes are involved when people decide to misreport financial data," Dr. Christensen says. "One of the attitudes involved is an acceptance to take gambles."

Fed Honed, Didn't Lower, Requirements for Bank Boards

The Federal Reserve's revised requirements for banks' boards of directors don't lower supervisory standards but aim expectations "more squarely toward senior management," William Lang writes for American Banker. Though the proposal has been viewed as a narrowing of the central bank's criteria for boards, it still requires "some substantial legwork" from banks to address weaknesses in oversight, says Mr. Lang, a former head of supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. "They face significant regulatory risk if they only concentrate on the narrowing of Fed demands for boards and fail to properly address the new expectations," he writes.

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged \b ISIS\b0  operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit.

Credit Suisse Group AG will prohibit trading of certain Venezuelan bonds, citing the country's political climate, according to an internal bank memo.

A former employee of online lender Social Finance Inc. accused the company in a lawsuit of wrongfully terminating him after he reported some managers had concealed errors made in processing loan applications and that another had harassed female employees by making sexual or inappropriate comments.

Stericycle, a Lake Forest, Ill.-based firm that handles medical waste, said it received an SEC subpoena relating to its compliance with U.S. foreign-bribery law regarding its operations in Latin America.

Canadian alternative lender Callidus Capital, accused by whistleblowers of fraud, swung to a second-quarter loss.

Send us your tips, suggestions and feedback. Write to:

Andrew Ackerman, Mark H. Anderson, Katy Burne, Sarah Chacko, Chao Deng, Danny Dougherty, Yuka Hayashi, Dave Michaels, Gabriel T. Rubin, Ryan Tracy, Julia-Ambra Verlaine, Aruna Viswanatha, Rachel Witkowski, Jana Zabkova.

Follow us on Twitter:

@amacker, @AndersonMH, @KatyBurne, @sarahheartsnews, @chao_deng, @DannyDougherty, @TokyoWoods, @DavidAMichaels, @Rubinations, @ryanjtracy, @JAVerlaine, @aviswanatha, @RachelWitkowski, @zabkova

Document RSTPROFR20170814ed8e000b5
