US
Arizona Man Sentenced for Planning Islamic State-Inspired Attack in Texas; Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem faces 30 years in prison for his role in attack on cartoon-drawing contest

By Dan Frosch 
551 words
9 February 2017
01:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A federal judge on Wednesday sentenced a Phoenix man to 30 years in prison for helping to plan an Islamic-State inspired attack in Texas, a case that resulted in the first conviction of its kind won by the Justice Department.

Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem, 45 years old, was found guilty last March of five charges related to his role in plotting an attack by two gunmen on a 2015 event in Garland, Texas, that featured a cartoon-drawing contest of the Prophet Muhammad. Both gunmen were killed in the attack, which wounded a security guard, and the Islamic State terror group claimed responsibility for the attack.

Mr. Kareem's trial had been a test case for the government as it was only the second time that a U.S. jury had decided the outcome of an Islamic State-related case.

Last year, federal prosecutors won their first trial conviction of a suspected Islamic State supporter in New York, but Mr. Kareem's case was the first instance in the U.S. where someone was tried for actually participating in the plotting of an Islamic State-inspired attack.

"Today's sentence, in the country's first trial involving a homeland terrorist attack committed in the name of ISIL, demonstrates the commitment of the United States to hold accountable any person who participates in or aids in any way acts of terrorism against our citizens," said Acting Arizona U.S. Attorney Elizabeth A. Strange, referring to Islamic State, sometimes called ISIL or ISIS for short.

Prosecutors had asked Judge Susan Bolton to sentence Mr. Kareem to 50 years in the case. A lawyer for Mr. Kareem, who pleaded not guilty, didn't immediately respond to a request for comment.

At Mr. Kareem's trial, prosecutors sought to portray the moving-company owner as the mastermind behind the Texas attack, saying he had persuaded the two gunmen, Elton Simpson and Nadir Soofi, to carry it out. Both men were friends of his, prosecutors said.

Prosecutors also said Mr. Kareem provided the two men with guns and ammunition for the cartoon-contest attack and taught them how to shoot. The men also discussed attacking the Super Bowl, which was held in Glendale, Ariz., in 2015, prosecutors said.

Mr. Kareem denied the allegations, taking the stand to testify that he had no knowledge of the attack before it happened. Mr. Kareem's defense lawyer said Mr. Kareem had been unjustly targeted simply because he was friends with the two gunmen.

A federal jury found him guilty of conspiring to provide material support to Islamic State, interstate transportation of firearms with the intent to commit murder and other charges.

Of the 114 individuals charged with ISIS related activities in the U.S. since March 2014, 65 have plead or been found guilty, according to Seamus Hughes, Deputy Director of the Program on Extremism at George Washington University. Only a small number of those case—t least a half dozen—ave gone to a jury, Mr. Hughes said.

Nicole Hong contributed to this article.

Write to Dan Frosch at dan.frosch@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170208ed2800ckt

Magazine
A Day in the Life of Karen Elson; Far from the fashion world, the singer-songwriter and model is right at home in Nashville

By Christopher Ross 
585 words
8 February 2017
16:37
WSJ. The Magazine from The Wall Street Journal
WSJM
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

I WANT TO LOOK like a Christmas tree," says Karen Elson, 38, as she pores over dresses in her airy walk-in closet. The model, singer-songwriter and mother of two is at home in Nashville, on a cloudy December afternoon, in search of an outfit for the evening. In four hours, she will arrive at the city's historic Ryman Auditorium to take part in the ensemble holiday performance Nashville Noel Nights, joining bandleaders Rufus and Martha Wainwright and country music legends Emmylou Harris and Alison Krauss. Elson will sing Johnny Cash's "Ringing the Bells for Jim"— chance to stretch her stage legs as she prepares to release her sophomore album, Double Roses, in April. "You can't hide," says Elson of performing at the Ryman. "It's kind of terrifying."

Yet an inability to hide has been one of the defining features of Elson's life. Raised in Manchester, England, the singer endured endless teasing from schoolmates and was known for her red hair and pale skin—he title of her 2010 debut record, The Ghost Who Walks, was one of her childhood nicknames. The fashion world, however, embraced her wan, bewitching look, affording her a high-flying modeling career that has seen her appear on the covers of Vogue and Elle; walk runways for Chanel, Yves Saint Laurent and Alexander McQueen; and serve as the global ambassador for major brands—he was recently named the newest face of Jo Malone London. Despite her success, she began quietly pursuing other interests, namely singing and songwriting, first finding an outlet for her talent with the Citizens Band, a New York cabaret troupe she helped found. In 2005, she married the musician Jack White, of the rock duo the White Stripes; the couple, who divorced in 2013, recorded The Ghost Who Walks, a collection of dusty folk tunes and bluesy ballads, in White's studio.

Elson's latest outing, inspired by a Sam Shepard poem, is slower, more introspective, infused with a longing that recalls Stevie Nicks. When she steps onstage in Nashville to sing in a radiant red Gucci dress, she doesn't much resemble a Christmas tree, but an English rose readily comes to mind.

Elson By the Numbers

10 years Length of time Elson has lived in Nashville, her adopted U.S. home. For a while, she ran the popular vintage boutique Venus and Mars with stylist Amy Patterson.

16 Age at which Elson was discovered by a modeling scout on the streets of Manchester while out shopping.

4 cats Total number of feline friends in the Elson household. "We've got cats coming out of our ears," she says.

527 followers Her cat Fergus's Instagram audience.

5 minutes Amount of time it took her to write the song "Hell and High Water" from her new album.

10 books Number of volumes on Elson's bedside table, including #Girlboss, The Girl Who Beat ISIS and a Linda Ronstadt biography.

2 guitars Elson keeps her Gibson Everly Brothers and Gretsch Princess in her bedroom.

30 musicians Number of artists who took part in the annual Nashville Noel Nights concert, a traveling benefit show held in honor of Rufus and Martha Wainwright's late mother, Kate McGarrigle.

10 songs Tracks on Elson's new Double Roses album, whittled down from the original 23.

Document WSJM000020170208ed2800001
