U.K. Terror Attack: Islamic State Adapts As It Loses Territory

By Benoit Faucon 
415 words
26 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

With Islamic State rapidly losing territory in Syria and Iraq, the group is relying more on homegrown terrorists such as the Manchester attacker while also sending more of its fighters abroad to stir violence, Western and Middle Eastern officials warn.

The suicide bombing that killed 22 people Monday outside a concert venue in the British city came as counterterrorism officials said they have been picking up mounting anecdotal evidence that Islamic State is redeploying its resources.

Iraqi forces have expelled the radical fighters from most of Mosul -- their last stronghold in the country -- and the group has been steadily losing ground in neighboring Syria as well.

"As ISIS loses territory, members are returning" to Europe, said a counterterrorism official for one of Iraq's Kurdish factions, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan. The official was in Austria on Tuesday briefing Western colleagues on the latest from the ground in northern Iraq. "There will be more attacks in Europe," the official predicted.

British Home Secretary Amber Rudd identified the suicide bomber as 22-year-old Salman Abedi and said he had traveled to the North African nation of Libya, where Islamic State has an active presence. Abedi's sister told The Wall Street Journal her brother was born and raised in England.

It wasn't yet clear whether Abedi, while abroad made contact with Islamic State, which claimed responsibility for the Manchester bombing.

The attack came as Islamic State is facing greater difficulties operating in Europe. Some fighters, both Europeans and Syrians, have slipped away after battle and are tapping cash stashed abroad, recent defectors, counterterrorism officials and other experts interviewed by the Journal said.

"They are not disappearing. They are just going underground," a European security official said.

One counterterrorism consultant for the U.K. government said banks have detected surprising movements of British jihadists returning. Though they are using fake passports, cash withdrawals show they travel to Malaysia, Italy and Dublin before flying back to Britain, the consultant said.

Some Syrian Islamic State operatives have been sent to Germany to blend in with the large refugee population, a European counterterrorism official said. To move money in Europe, they have been using prepaid travel cards, the official said.

The patterns suggest Islamic State is directing them to use diverging paths so they won't be detected when they return to Europe, the consultant said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170526ed5q0001p
