U.S.; Politics
American Detained by Military Wants a Lawyer, Government Acknowledges

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
989 words
30 November 2017
21:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n American citizen who has been held in military custody in Iraq for 11 weeks refused to talk to F.B.I. interrogators without a lawyer after he was warned of his Miranda rights to remain silent and have a lawyer present, the Justice Department told a federal judge on Thursday.

“he individual stated he understood his rights, and said he was willing to talk to the agents but also stated that since he was in a new phase, he felt he should have an attorney present,”he department said in a court filing Thursday afternoon. “he agents explained that due to his current situation, it was unknown when he would be able to have an attorney, and the individual stated that it was O.K. and that he is a patient man.”

The filing came in response to an order by Judge Tanya S. Chutkan of the Federal District Court of the District of Columbia, after a contentious hearing earlier on Thursday during which she warned that the Trump administration seemed to be claiming “nchecked power that is, quite frankly, frightening.”

The case centers on an American who was captured by a Syrian militia in mid-September, apparently fighting for the Islamic State, and turned over to American military forces. Although the International Committee for the Red Cross has visited the detainee twice, the government has kept secret even the most basic facts about him, including his name.

But a senior administration official has told The New York Times that the detainee was born in the United States to foreign parents and raised in an unidentified Middle Eastern country. The official also said that after being interrogated for intelligence purposes, the detainee was read the Miranda warning and had not talked since then.

But Judge Chutkan said on Thursday that she did not want to rely on news reports and wanted the government to disclose such information.

The detainee has raised a dilemma because national security officials believe the man was an Islamic State fighter and do not want to release him, but they lack sufficient evidence to charge him with a terrorism-related crime, officials have said.

At the same time, keeping him in long-term wartime detention without trial as an enemy combatant is seen as unpalatable inside the government, in part because it would give a judge an opportunity to rule that the congressional authorization to fight Al Qaeda does not extend to the Islamic State.

The hearing centered on a habeas corpus lawsuit filed by the American Civil Liberties Union in October on behalf of the man. The rights group is asking Judge Chutkan to order the government to give its lawyers access to the detainee and, more broadly, to declare that his continued indefinite detention without charges is unlawful.

But the Justice Department has argued that the A.C.L.U. has no standing to bring the lawsuit because it has no relationship with him and has not even gained permission from his relatives to represent his interests in court. For that reason, it said, Judge Chutkan lacks jurisdiction and must dismiss the case.

During the hearing, Judge Chutkan, a 2014 appointee of President Barack Obama, signaled discomfort with that position. She accused the Justice Department of employing “ircular reasoning”ince the government’ own actions have prevented him or his relatives from having contact with the lawyers.

The judge also expressed incredulity that the government, two and a half months into the man’ detention, was still trying to decide what to do with him, asking whether there was any limit to how long officials could take.

“ don’ have an answer,” Justice Department lawyer, Kathryn Wyer, replied. She said the government was “iligently”orking on the problem.

The judge also suggested the government was saying it could “natch any U.S. citizen off the street and hold him as an enemy combatant in another country”ndefinitely without letting him or her talk to a lawyer. She then made her comment about frighteningly unchecked power, and she also portrayed the government as essentially saying, “ust trust us; we know what we’e doing.”

Ms. Wyer pushed back, emphasizing that the government took custody of him on a battlefield. Citing a 2008 case about Guantáamo detainees, she said the Supreme Court had said that the government has a right to take some time to decide what to do with prisoners captured in wartime before they may file habeas petitions.

Jonathan Hafetz, an A.C.L.U. lawyer, told the judge that the case was a “ightmare scenario”nd urged her not to dismiss the case, saying that at a minimum she should ask the detainee whether he wanted to file a habeas corpus petition and, if so, wanted the A.C.L.U. to represent him.

But Ms. Wyer argued that Judge Chutkan lacked the authority to carry out even that kind of intervention if the A.C.L.U. had no standing to file the case in the first place.

The court filing suggested that American officials had not raised the issue of a habeas corpus case with the detainee, saying the Justice Department was “ot currently aware of any additional information regarding the individual’ wishes in connection with his invocation of constitutional rights or pursuit of remedies in U.S. courts.”

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter: @charlie_savage.

* American Held as \b ISIS\b0  Suspect, Creating a Quandary for the Trump Administration

* An American Held as an \b ISIS\b0  Suspect Deserves a Prompt Hearing

An American citizen who was captured by a Syrian militia while apparently fighting for the Islamic State is being held by the United States military. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Judge Tanya S. Chutkan of United States District Court for the District of Columbia. | United States Courts 

Document NYTFEED020171130edbu008sp
