World
Syrian Opposition Monitors Say Coalition Airstrikes Hit School; Coalition says there is ‘o indication' its aircraft struck civilians near Raqqa

By Noam Raydan 
314 words
22 March 2017
16:14
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT—pposition groups that monitor the Syrian conflict said Wednesday that coalition aircraft struck a school this week sheltering the homeless near the militant-held city of Raqqa, leaving at least 33 Syrians dead.

One of the groups, the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, described the bombing Monday as a "new massacre committed by the U.S.-led coalition."

The coalition said Wednesday it had "no indication" that its aircraft had hit the civilians. In a statement, it noted that its aircraft routinely strike Islamic State targets near Raqqa, the Sunni Muslim radical group's de facto capital in Syria. It also said it would provide its civilian casualty team with the observatory's information.

The claim of coalition responsibility for the airstrike by the observatory and the antigovernment activist network Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently came as officials of the 68-nation coalition gathered in Washington at the invitation of the Trump administration to discuss strategy to defeat Islamic State.

About 116 civilians have been killed in coalition airstrikes since March 8, the observatory said, as U.S.-backed Kurdish ground forces close in on Raqqa and the coalition's air campaign in the area intensifies.

The observatory's casualty toll couldn't be independently confirmed.

The coalition has been accused of causing civilian casualties before.

Rescue workers and opposition monitoring groups said last week that at least 46 Syrian civilians were killed in a coalition airstrike near the northern Syrian city of Aleppo.

A Pentagon spokesman later confirmed the airstrike on March 16 but said it was unaware of any "credible" reports of civilian casualties.

Related

* U.S. Increases Support for New Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Operation

* Coalition Meets in U.S. to Assess Islamic State Strategy

Document WSJO000020170322ed3m002ey
