World; Europe
Suspect in Istanbul Nightclub Attack Confesses, Officials Say

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
517 words
17 January 2017
11:17
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Uzbek man who was taken into custody and is suspected of carrying out an attack at an upscale Istanbul nightclub, killing 39 people early on New Year’ Day, has confessed, the Turkish authorities said on Tuesday.

The suspect, identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov, an Uzbek citizen born in 1983, received help in the attack, done “n the name of \b ISIS\b0 ,”asip Sahin, the governor of Istanbul, said at a news conference, referring to the Islamic State militant group, which claimed responsibility for the rampage.

Mr. Masharipov, whose arrest was also confirmed by Prime Minister Binali Yildirim, was detained on Monday night after the police raided a residence in the Esenyurt district of Istanbul.

He was arrested with four others, an Iraqi man and three women from countries including Egypt and another country on the African continent, the governor said.

Turkish news organizations released photographs of the suspect, taken in custody, showing bruises and blood on his face, but Mr. Sahin said Mr. Masharipov had not opened fire when confronted by the police, and that they had not used weapons while arresting him.

“e admitted his crime,”aid Mr. Sahin, who added that the suspect was trained in Afghanistan, speaks four languages and was a well-trained terrorist. “is fingerprints matched,”e added, although he did not elaborate.

Mr. Sahin said the interrogation was continuing —e described it as “ery new”—nd said that more would be learned about who had helped Mr. Masharipov, and how.

Mr. Masharipov, who used the alias Abu Mohammed Khorasani Abdulqavi, entered Turkey illegally in January 2016 “rom the eastern border,”he governor said.

Mr. Sahin, who was standing next to the Istanbul police chief, Mustafa Caliskan, in front of Police Headquarters, said a team of 2000 officers and special forces had been called in to capture the assailant.

The police had been focusing on five addresses, and Mr. Masharipov was caught at one of them, Mr. Sahin said.

The police examined 7,200 hours of video footage in their search for the attacker and raided 152 different addresses, detaining 50 people along the way.

A pistol, an air gun, their magazines, two drones and $197,000 were seized during the raid on the residence where Mr. Masharipov was found.

TV footage showed a cluttered apartment with white walls and white furniture. Dust fingerprints were still visible on kitchen closets and tables.

The governor said that Mr. Masharipov’ 4-year-old son, who had been reported to be with his father during the operation in Esenyurt, had not been present.

* Suspect in Istanbul Rampage on New Year’ Is Captured, Turkey Says

* Nightclub Massacre in Istanbul Exposes Turkey’ Deepening Fault Lines

* Terrorist Attack at Nightclub in Istanbul Kills Dozens

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Responsibility for Istanbul Nightclub Attack

Turkish special forces officers at Police Headquarters in Istanbul on Tuesday. | Murad Sezer/Reuters | The Turkish authorities say the man identified as Abdulgadir Masharipov has confessed to the New Year’ attack in Istanbul. | Turkish Police, via Depo Photos 

Document NYTFEED020170117ed1h00335
