World News:  ISIS  Seeks Revival in Libya, Gate to Europe --- Small cells of fighters operate in the country a year after the group lost control of Sirte

By Hassan Morajea in Tunis, Tunisia, and Benoit Faucon in London 
1,026 words
19 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State has formed a number of clandestine cells in Libya a year after losing its main stronghold in the chaotic North African country, part of the militant group's efforts to regroup on Europe's doorstep.

The small cells, comprising up to several dozen fighters, have set up new bases outside Libyan towns in the past several months and started making money by hijacking commercial trucks and extorting migrant-smuggling rings, according to Libyan and European security officials.

Islamic State has also told fighters to go to Libya from Syria, where a U.S.-led coalition is pushing the terror group from its de facto capital of Raqqa, according to a defector and European security officials.

"They consider Libya to be the main entrance to Europe," said Abu Baara al-Ansari, a Syrian who says he defected from Islamic State in June. Mr. al-Ansari said he worked in Raqqa for Islamic State in the office that tracked visitors to the group's territory. He is now in Turkey and was interviewed via the Telegram messaging system.

The group's efforts to stage a comeback in Libya after losing control of the coastal city of Sirte last year have sparked concern among European officials.

A resurgent Islamic State "is definitely becoming a problem in Libya," a European security official said.

Members of Libya's Presidential Council, which presides over the Tripoli government, didn't respond to requests to comment about Islamic State's activities in the country.

Islamic State said two years ago it planned to infiltrate migrant groups and carry out attacks in Europe.

Salman Abedi, a British citizen of Libyan descent, blew himself up outside a concert in Manchester in May, killing 22 people. Abedi had recently returned from a trip to Libya, and European security officials say the type of bomb he used indicates he may have been trained by Islamic State fighters there.

Since the death of Col. Moammar Gadhafi in 2011, warring factions have carved Libya into fiefs and fought over its oil fields, leaving the economy in tatters.

"Daesh is exploiting the security vacuum," said an intelligence officer from the city of Misrata who works with forces loyal to Tripoli, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Militias from Misrata -- who support the United Nations-backed Government of National Accord in the capital, Tripoli -- led the successful campaign to oust Islamic State from Sirte.

An estimate by the U.S. Africa Command, which oversees American military operations on the continent, indicates there are only about 500 Islamic State members active in Libya now. That is down from a peak of about 3,000 fighters when the group held Sirte in 2016.

But other officials said it is difficult to know how many Islamic State fighters are currently in Libya. And they say the group's ability to operate relatively unhindered around the country raises concerns.

Since driving Islamic State out of Sirte, the U.S. has seen "a marked decrease" in the number of foreign fighters traveling to or from the conflict in Libya, according to a U.S. State Department official.

European security officials and the Islamic State defector say the group's fighters -- including Syrians and Iraqis, as well as Libyans -- have been trying to enter Libya in hopes of reaching Europe to launch attacks.

Islamic State members have in the past flown from Turkey to Sudan before going overland to Libya, according to European security officials. Meanwhile, Libyan forces in the south are monitoring a group of Islamic State recruits who made their way to Sudan from Syria and are trying to cross into Libya, according to a security official from the area with forces loyal to Tripoli.

Libyans were among those who trained at Islamic State's weapons lab in Raqqa, according to another Islamic State defector. Some of the devices were intended both for battlefield use and for carrying out attacks in Europe, said the defector, who said that he was involved in their design and that he left the group in 2016.

In Libya, a rival government operates in the east of the country, where a group allied with Islamic State was ousted this year from the city of Benghazi. In late May, two members of the allied group were dispatched by Islamic State from Benghazi to go to Istanbul, according to a third person who said he had defected from Islamic State and who said he remains in contact with the group in Raqqa.

They were directed to make their way from Istanbul to Athens and to wait for orders about carrying out an attack in Europe, the defector said. A European security official said last month the movements of the two men were being monitored.

Islamic State fighters who escaped Sirte fled to other parts of Libya such as Bani Walid, west of Sirte. The fighters remained hidden in the surrounding valleys for months, but now have started to "set up checkpoints at times and hijack trucks and any goods in them," said the intelligence officer from Misrata.

Other fighters escaped to the southwestern town of Ghat, near the Algerian border. The group has since expanded its presence in that part of the country to the desert oasis of Ubari, with fighters holding regular meetings in the town and moving freely in the vicinity of Libya's largest oil field, according to the security official from southern Libya.

In May, Islamic State seized three fuel trucks en route to Jufra, a district between Sirte and Ubari, according to an Aug. 22 report from the U.N. Security Council.

Islamic State also has a presence in other Libyan cities and towns, and groups that can range from 5 to 50 fighters roam outside urban areas, the intelligence officer from Misrata said.

---

Ben Kesling, Nicholas Bariyo, Nour Malas, Nour Alakraa and Jenny Gross contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170918ed9j0001f
