World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,121 words
18 September 2017
12:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Will We Still Have Paris?

White House economic chief Gary Cohn is expected Monday to outline the administration's proposals to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions while restating that its stance on the Paris climate accord hasn't changed. Mr. Cohn's planned breakfast discussion in New York—n how the U.S. can continue to cut emissions without sacrificing its re-emergence as a leading energy producer—ollows signals over the weekend that the U.S. is exploring ways to remain in the 2015 pact. Trump administration officials on Sunday confirmed the president is open to revising U.S. commitments under the accord rather than quitting it entirely. The White House has said this isn't a shift: In announcing the U.S. exit in June, Mr. Trump left open the possibility of re-entering the deal or crafting a new one "on terms that are fair to the United States." But he has since repeatedly boasted of withdrawing from the "job-killing" accord and hasn't emphasized revising U.S. participation.

Bank of Parts of America

Since the financial crisis, Bank of America has gotten rid of around 1,600 branches— striking departure for a bank built over decades on the idea of offering a coast-to-coast network in areas urban and rural. From 2009 to 2016, the bank reduced the number of U.S. counties in which it has branches by more than a third. But it is moving into a number of big metropolitan areas where it previously didn't have branches, a rare move for a big bank in recent years. We look at why Bank of America is retreating from its "bigger is better" approach: The shift is driven by both demographic changes and fallout from the financial crisis, and stems in part from two large acquisitions, of U.S. Trust and Merrill Lynch.

Hack of the Ages

The massive data breach at Equifax has reverberated through the credit-reporting industry, spooked consumers and sparked a federal criminal investigation. From about mid-May to July 30, hackers ransacked vast troves of information, potentially exposing the personal information of 143 million Americans. We take a close look at what happened: A focus for inquiry is a software glitch, initially reported by Cisco in March, that appears to be how the intruders got in. Equifax said Friday its technology experts worked at the time of the report to identify and patch vulnerable systems. Although investigators are still working on who was behind the break-in, the scale of the breach, sophistication of the hack and nature of the stolen data all point toward a state-sponsored actor.

Plaudits and Politics

At the 69th Emmys Sunday night, Hulu planted a flag by winning the award for Outstanding Drama Series in the first year it was nominated in the category. The streaming service's "The Handmaid's Tale" beat out nominees from established Emmy contenders AMC, HBO, NBC and Netflix. In comedy, though, continuity reigned: HBO's "Veep" won for the third year in a row. At times political barbs threatened to upstage the honorees. Host Stephen Colbert took digs at President Trump's TV-watching habits and the lack of Emmy wins for "The Celebrity Apprentice." In a surprise turn, former press secretary Sean Spicer took the stage to deliver superlatives about the size of the Emmy audience. See a full recap of the show here. 

Today's Video

Four Times the Fun

When a coach told Jeremy Easterbrook he would never be good enough to play badminton in the Olympics, he didn't give up the game, but instead took up three more: The 28-year-old is now ranked second in Canada in racketlon, which combines table tennis, badminton, squash and tennis in a single match against the same opponent. He shows us the proper swings in each sport.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Texas Cities Struggle to House Thousands Displaced by Hurricane Harvey

Russia Probe Takes Financial Toll on Trump Aides

WORLD

U.K. Considers Arming More Police

As \b ISIS\b0  Falters, U.S. Allies and Syrian Regime Maneuver for Advantage

BUSINESS

CFO at 29? Kraft Heinz Move Spotlights a Pattern at Investor 3G Capital

Unlike Most Industries, Drone Makers and Operators Clamor for Federal Regulation

MARKETS

How Traders Are Making Money as Oil Prices Go Nowhere

China Scrambles to Catch Up With Runaway Boom in Fintech Investment

Number of the Day

$7.8 billion

The price Northrop Grumman is paying for fellow defense contractor Orbital, as acquisition activity in the aerospace industry ramps up.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, do you think the U.S. should withdraw from the Paris accord? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to Friday's question on North Korea's firing another missile over Japan, Eric Y. Larson of Virginia said: "Perhaps the U.S. should let China and Russia know we will no longer provide the strictest security for nuclear technology and nuclear material when in receipt of inquiries from South Korea and Japan." Bill Sanders of Colorado wrote: "North Korea is a symptom; the problem is a nuclear-armed world, including many more rogue countries. We need a Trump Doctrine on foreign policy as definitive as the Monroe Doctrine was in 1823, that America will not tolerate any further nuclear-armed countries including North Korea and Iran and that we will use all forces necessary to make that happen. America is the only nation that can enforce such a doctrine and this is the last time we can. This may sound harsh, but think of the alternative and the world down the road." And Stephen Pearcy of South Carolina commented: "The more often they do this, the more likely a malfunction with impact on Japan. That will put a permanent end to North Korean missile launches."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170918ed9i001jl
