Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest Winner, Week 8 | On ‘ars Suck Up Data About You. Where Does It All Go?’

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
996 words
22 August 2017
13:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Thank you to the 1223 teenagers who participated in the eighth week of our 10-week Summer Reading Contest, and congratulations to John Fernandez Philippides, our winner, as well as to our many runners-up and honorable mentions.

Scroll down to take a look at the variety of topics —rom North Korea and ocean-polluting plastic to affirmative action and shelter dogs —hat caught the eyes of our participants.

And remember: Our 2017 contest ends on Aug. 25.

Winner

John Fernandez Philippides, from Boston, Mass., chose “Cars Suck Up Data About You. Where Does It All Go?”nd wrote:

Born in 2000, I have rarely worried about the risks of the digital age. But this article about the information that cars collect about us spurred a dramatic shift in my opinion about privacy and data-tracking. For a long time, I didn’ care what information companies and the government knew about me. I couldn’ believe that my mom required us to keep our new Amazon Echo turned off and far from where we talked. When I complained about her unfounded paranoia, she revealed that her reasons for moving Alexa were more complex than I thought.

My mother’ family lived in Argentina during part of the “irty War,” period starting in 1976 when the government abducted and killed thousands of Argentine citizens. Her father suspected that the government was spying on his family. When a group of soldiers entered their apartment and tore through his family’ belongings without their consent, they fled to the United States. I learned that the fear of surveillance is more deeply instilled in my mother than it ever could be in me, and my apathy began to erode.

Last week, as I read how auto companies sell information about our driving habits and daily routines, sometimes without our consent, I wondered whether my family would have survived if the Argentine government had access to that kind of data and technology.

Now, unless I need her, Alexa remains turned off in my study.

Runners-Up

Lauren Coppins on “The Secret Life of Pain”

Caitlin Gainey on “The Immense, Eternal Footprint Humanity Leaves on Earth: Plastics”

Sally Meseret on “After an Interlude of Outrage, a Lobster's Star Turn Ends”

Nicholas Romano on “Outcry Over EpiPen Prices Hasn’ Made Them Lower”

Julia S on “After an Interlude of Outrage, a Lobster’ Star Turn Ends”

Jack Stein on “What Can North Korea Reach With Its Missiles?”

Honorable Mentions

Sara Altschuler on “Gene Editing Spurs Hope for Transplanting Pig Organs Into Humans”

John Andreana on “Colin Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.”

Emily Axelsen on “Why Kids Can’ Write”

Layan Busafar on “Taylor Swift Says Man Groped Her in ‘evious and Sneaky Act’”

Madeline Carleton on “‘ ‘amilton’ip-Hop, by Students”

Matthew Choi on “Minnesota Governor Calls Mosque Attack a ‘riminal Act of Terrorism’”

Edie Conekin-Tooze on “Citing Free Speech, A.C.L.U. Sues Washington Metro Over Rejected Ads”

Luke Denver on “Colin Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.”

Itziar de Pedro on “Venice, Invaded by Tourists, Risks Becoming ‘isneyland on the Sea’”

Kayleigh Early on “YouTube Falls Hard for ‘n a Heartbeat,’ Boy-Meets-Boy Story”

Sydney Gallo on “Should I Help My Patients Die?”

Trevor Gauronski on “Is This Dog Dangerous? Shelters Struggle With Live-or-Die Tests”

Gavin Giuliani on “Behind Berkeley’ Semester of Hate”

GoBlue18Hannah on “How to Be Mindful Walking in the Rain”

GoBlue18Liam on “Colin Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.”

Leah Gooding (WHS) on “Learning to Learn: You, Too, Can Rewire Your Brain”

Kimberly Hou on “They’l Shoot Horses, Won’ They?”

Emily R. HuskieHonors11 on “Developmentally Disabled, and Going to College”

Loren Kennedy on “Fighting for Basic Rights in Morocco”

Irina Lee on “Allies in Combat, Now Unwanted”

Younghoon Lee on “North Korean Defector, ‘reated Like Dirt’n South, Fights to Return”

Asher Lipman on “Why Kids Can’ Write”

Maeve Merzena on “The Meaning of ‘espacito’n the Age of Trump”

MichaelW on “What a Fraternity Hazing Death Revealed About the Painful Search for an Asian-American Identity”

Kaeli Montague on “How We Make Black Girls Grow Up Too Fast”

Stephen Mooney on “SpaceX Is Now One of the World’ Most Valuable Privately Held Companies”

Kristina Pendelberry on “Review: At Vail, Female Choreographers Feed the Mighty River of Dance”

Ethan Pintar on “Trump and Senators Seek to Slash Legal Immigration”

Jay Poland on “Trump Says Transgender People Will Not Be Allowed in the Military”

Aneta Sieminski on “How to Prepare Preschoolers for an Automated Economy”

Andrew Siyoon Ham on “Four Castaways Make a Family”

Ethan Reiser on “Iran Bans Two Soccer Stars for Playing Against Israelis”

Sana Shareef on “Justice Dept. to Take On Affirmative Action in College Admissions”

Shruthi Shekar on “Iraq’ Hardball Tactics to Root Out \b ISIS\b0 ”

Alexa Stewart on “Ras Baraka: Immigrants Living in Fear”

Beth Straight on “A Solution to Hackers? More Hackers”

Katelyn Swope on “Venice, Invaded by Tourists, Risks Becoming ‘isneyland on the Sea’”

Dominic T-C on “Admit This Ex-Con to the Connecticut Bar”

Sophia Thomas on “Dunkirk, the War and the Amnesia of the Empire”

Tina on “The Universe Doesn’ Care About Your ‘urpose’”

Celia Young on “Campus Political Fights Come Home for the Summer”

Kevin Zhang on “Opioid Users Are Filling Jails. Why Don’ Jails Treat Them?”

Selina Zhang on “Punch With Pakistani Girls at a Karachi Boxing Club”

Zack Zhao on “China’ Internet Censors Play a Tougher Game of Cat and Mouse”

Automakers, local governments, retailers, insurers and tech companies are looking to leverage the data that cars generate. Related Article | Andrew Cullen for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170822ed8m0030e
