World News: Trump's Visit Wins Saudi Support --- Speech in Riyadh isn't expected to gain Mr. Trump points from other Muslims

By William Mauldin 
702 words
23 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump's visit to Saudi Arabia achieved a measure of foreign-policy success by shoring up U.S. alliances, distracting from the president's domestic difficulties, and sidestepping some of the thornier problems simmering in the region, according to lawmakers and Mideast experts.

In a speech in the Saudi Arabian capital, Mr. Trump challenged the heads of state in the region to help in "honestly confronting the crisis of Islamist extremism and the Islamist terror groups it inspires," saying terrorists should be driven "out of this earth." Mr. Trump also said "all nations of conscience must work together to isolate Iran, deny it funding for terrorism," without providing concrete details of U.S. strategy toward Tehran.

"This is someone who is making it clear that we're making common cause with those who are prepared to take on ISIS and the Iranians," said Dennis Ross, a former U.S. envoy in the region and senior fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

Mr. Trump's messages were received warmly by the leaders in the region because their governments are some of the biggest targets for terrorism and are also under pressure from Iran, which supports militants in Iraq, Syria and Yemen.

"It is to some extent preaching at the choir," said Anthony Cordesman, strategy chair at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. "All of this sends a kind of message about American resolve and American concern for its Arab allies."

The visit served as reassurance for Saudi Arabia and allied nations after former President Barack Obama appeared to seek closer relations with Iran while negotiating a nuclear agreement with the country, and after the 2016 presidential campaign raised questions about the U.S. appetite for foreign entanglements.

Mr. Trump's decision to visit Saudi Arabia and Israel before other countries -- and his warm rhetoric for their leadership -- signals a shift away from Mr. Obama's policy in the region, which Mr. Trump has blamed for the turmoil there.

The trip also shows Mr. Trump appears eager to use his international authority to work with allies and court success on the global stage as he faces political headaches back home that may hamper his domestic goals,said Aaron David Miller,a former senior State Department official now at Washington's Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.

In his speech Sunday, Mr. Trump had to strike a balance between cooperation with the majority-Muslim countries and loyalty to his domestic political base, which includes supporters who backed his campaign promise to ban Muslims from entering the U.S.

"He got in and out of the speech conundrum fairly well," Mr. Miller said. "He made a few of the right points, missed many of the bad ones, dodged the bullet on formulations of 'radical Islamic terrorism' that could be seen as terribly offending."

The speech in Riyadh isn't likely to win Mr. Trump support among Muslims. "One speech cannot outweigh years of anti-Muslim rhetoric and policy proposal," saidNihad Awad, the executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, a Muslim advocacy organization.

Some of Mr. Trump's political partners also were turned off. Roger Stone, a Republican operative who was closely involved with Mr. Trump's campaign, responded to a photograph of King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud placing a medal around the president's neck by writing on Twitter: "Candidly, this makes me want to puke."

Mr. Trump avoided sensitive issues of human rights, repressive regimes and official support for Muslim clerics in the region who inspire some militant extremists. The absence of a human-rights discussion drew quick criticism from Democratic and Republican lawmakers.

"I think this is a broader element of the administration's policy, that they're going to de-emphasize issues of human rights -- that what countries do within their own boundaries, we're essentially going to look the other way," said Rep. Adam Schiff (D., Calif.).

---

Kate O'Keeffe and Tamer El-Ghobashy contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170522ed5n0001d
