Foreign Desk; SECTA
Russian and Turkish Forces Conduct Joint Airstrikes Against  ISIS  in Syria

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and ERIC SCHMITT; Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting from Moscow. 
807 words
19 January 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
7
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- Russia and Turkey carried out their first joint airstrikes against Islamic State positions in Syria on Wednesday, further expanding their budding military cooperation, the Russian military said.

The Russians have conducted airstrikes in recent weeks against Islamic State fighters near the northern Syrian town of Al Bab, an intervention that appears designed to help Turkish ground forces and the Syrian militias backed by the Turks in their campaign to capture the town.

But now, the Russian Air Force has gone a step further by collaborating on missions with Turkey's Air Force, the Russian military announced.

''Today, Russian and Turkish Air Forces are carrying out their first joint air operation against the Islamic State in the suburbs of Al Bab,'' Lt. Gen. Sergei F. Rudskoi, a senior member of the Russian general staff, told journalists on Wednesday in Moscow.

The Russian military's decision to highlight its role appeared intended to curry favor with the Turks and exploit growing tensions between the departing Obama administration and President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey.

Turkish officials have objected to the Pentagon's plans to arm Syrian Kurds so they can spearhead the offensive to retake Raqqa, the capital of the Islamic State. President Obama convened his National Security Council on Tuesday to discuss the question. But there has been no indication that Mr. Obama is prepared to authorize arming the Syrian Kurds in the waning hours of his administration.

The growing military cooperation between the Russians and Turks follows top-level political consultations over Syria, including a meeting in Moscow in December among Russian, Turkish and Iranian officials; American officials were not invited.

General Rudskoi said 36 targets had been selected in advance by military officers from the two countries. Nine Russian warplanes and eight Turkish aircraft conducted the strikes, he said.

The Turkish military acknowledged in a statement that Russian warplanes had attacked Islamic State positions south of Al Bab under an agreement between Turkey and Russia, but did not discuss the role of Turkish aircraft. There was no independent verification of the Russian claim that all of the targets had been destroyed.

In recent days, the United States has also carried out airstrikes near Al Bab to help the Turkish forces that are struggling to take the town. The American strikes also seem intended to ease the tensions between the United States and Turkey. In effect, Russian and American air power is being used not just to attack the Islamic State but also to compete for influence in Ankara, the Turkish capital.

Former military and diplomatic officials said the cooperation between Turkey, a NATO ally, and Russia, the foremost threat to the NATO alliance, was worrisome.

''Turkey is going to be an increasingly unreliable ally,'' said Eric Edelman, a former American ambassador to Turkey. ''It is a worrisome development and underscores the need for a very high-level strategic dialogue with Turkey that is long overdue.''

James G. Stavridis, the retired admiral who formerly served as NATO's top military commander before becoming dean of the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University, said the emerging alliance raised a host of concerns, including how much intelligence the United States military should share with the Turks.

''It will immediately raise tactical questions of intelligence sharing, de-confliction with U.S. airstrikes, and basing out of Turkey for U.S. aircraft,'' Admiral Stavridis said in an email. ''Strategically, this apparent alignment of a powerful ally with the alliance's most obvious opponent significantly increases the degree of difficulty for the new administration in terms of finding its footing as a leader within NATO.''

Pentagon officials have sought publicly to play down the mounting indications of Turkish-Russian military collaboration. Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, told reporters last week that he had been assured by his Turkish counterpart that the Turks were not cooperating with the Russians.

''As you may know, I speak quite frequently with my Turkish counterpart,'' General Dunford said then. ''He's also said that the Turks at this time are not cooperating and coordinating, conducting operations in conjunction with the Russians.''

Gen. David L. Goldfein, the Air Force chief of staff, was more circumspect when asked about the Russian announcement during an appearance Wednesday at the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington policy research center. ''I am not concerned right now,'' General Goldfein said. ''But we are all watching very closely to see how this goes.''

Follow Michael R. Gordon @gordonnyt and Eric Schmitt @EricSchmittNYT on Twitter.

Lt. Gen. Sergei F. Rudskoi of the Russian general staff spoke about the strikes. (PHOTOGRAPH BY IVAN SEKRETAREV/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170119ed1j0005g
