World; Asia Pacific
As Mattis Arrives in Philippines, Mop-Up in Marawi Is Declared Over

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
576 words
23 October 2017
10:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —he Philippines on Monday declared an end to months of fighting against Islamic State-inspired militants in the southern city of Marawi, saying that the last “tragglers”ad been killed in a firefight with the army.

The announcement came on the same day that the American defense secretary, Jim Mattis, arrived in the Philippines for an annual meeting of defense ministers in the region.

Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana of the Philippines said more than 40 militants, including at least five foreigners, had been killed when Philippine soldiers stormed a building in Marawi where they were holed up. Forty-two bodies were recovered, said Mr. Lorenzana, who called the militants “he last group of stragglers”n the monthslong siege.

“e now announce the termination of all combat operations in Marawi,”r. Lorenzana said at the Clark Freeport Zone, north of Manila, formerly a sprawling American military base.

Mr. Mattis told reporters before his arrival on Monday that the Philippines had delivered a “ery necessary message to the terrorists”n Marawi. Mr. Mattis and the other defense chiefs were expected to discuss Islamist militancy and other issues affecting the region, including North Korea’ nuclear pursuits and territorial disputes in the South China Sea.

Mr. Lorenzana’ announcement came 154 days after militants led by Isnilon Hapilon, whose Abu Sayyaf group is affiliated with the Islamic State, sacked the southern city of 200,000, burning homes, killing Christians and prompting most residents to flee.

The fighting was set off on May 23, when the Philippine military moved to arrest Mr. Hapilon and was surprised by a huge rebel force that had stockpiled large numbers of weapons.

Since then, much of the city has been devastated as the military, with intelligence support from the United States and Australia, fought to reclaim it. At least 1,000 people have been killed, most of them militants.

President Rodrigo Duterte said last week that Marawi had been “iberated,” though officials later clarified that there were still fighters in the city. Mr. Hapilon was killed last week, as were the last of the Maute brothers, who led a militant group allied with Mr. Hapilon’, and Mahmud Ahmad, a Malaysian who the authorities described as a key financier for the militants and a link to the Islamic State in Syria.

Mr. Lorenzana said the military had crushed the “ost serious attempt to export violent extremism and radicalism”o the southern Philippines.

“hile we submit that these tactical and strategic gains will not annihilate the ideology completely, we declare that this achievement is a clear manifestation of how our regional cooperation can lead to a decisive advance against the proliferation of terrorism in this part of the world,”e said.

* Philippines Calls City ‘iberated,’onths After \b ISIS\b0  Allies Seized It

* Philippines Says It Killed \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Leader in Push to Reclaim City

* In City of Ruins, Philippines’attle Against \b ISIS\b0  Rages On

The southern Philippine city of Marawi on Monday. The government called the city “iberated”ast week, and on Monday, the final militant holdouts were said to have been killed. | Romeo Ranoco/Reuters | Defense Secretary Delfin Lorenzana, left, said Monday that the “ast group of stragglers”n Marawi had been killed in a firefight with the military. At right is Gen. Eduardo Añ, the head of the Philippine armed forces. | Bullit Marquez/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020171023edan00235
