World
Iraq Faces Tough Task of Rebuilding Mosul After  ISIS  Defeat; Swaths of the country's second-largest city were largely flattened by months of fighting

By Karen Leigh and Asa Fitch 
1,070 words
11 July 2017
19:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq—he day after announcing Islamic State's defeat in Mosul, Iraqis turned to the enormous challenges of rebuilding and resettling the country's second-largest city.

The municipal government worked Tuesday to repair and open roads in the western side of the city, where the terror group made its last stand in Mosul. Swaths of that half of the city were largely flattened in months of fighting, with streets impassable and basic services nonexistent.

"Our priority now is getting people home," said Abdulsattar Alhabbu, head of the Mosul municipality. "Our focus is on west Mosul, where most of the damage from the fight happened. Our priority is bringing back the water supply. There is no life without water."

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi proclaimed victory over Islamic State in Mosul on Monday. The government declared a holiday on Tuesday and a week of official celebrations. But even amid the festive atmosphere, Mr. Abadi referenced the tremendous economic and security challenges ahead. An Iraqi counterterrorism forces commander said the fight to clean up the last remaining pockets of Islamic State resistance in Mosul was continuing on Tuesday.

Nearly nine months of fighting to drive the extremist group from the city displaced more than 800,000 residents, according to the International Organization for Migration. Many say they won't return home until water and other basic services are restored— task that will take at least six weeks, according to Hussameldin al-Abbar, an official of Nineveh province, where Mosul is located.

"Nearly every building on the western side of Mosul was completely destroyed. With this level of devastation, it's very unlikely that the hundreds of thousands of displaced families will be going home anytime soon," said Arnaud Quemin, interim Iraq country director for aid group Mercy Corps. "This is a critical moment for Mosul."

That lack of basic services is keeping thousands of residents like Ahmed Suleiman Abdullah staying put in desert camps for displaced people near Mosul, even as scorching summer temperatures soar above 110 degrees. Mr. Abdullah fled in March with his two wives and nine children after his house in western Mosul was partly destroyed by fighting.

"One of the major problems is there is no water supply to the area and no electricity," he said recently. "How do you survive with kids with no water?"

Part of his house could be repaired quickly if he had money to do it, Mr. Abdullah said.

"We had no jobs for three years under Daesh," he said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State. "We spent all our savings, and now there is no work and we have nothing."

Khalid Muhammed, 32, a stationery and cosmetics shop owner in western Mosul, said last week that he reopened last month as people started to return. But a lack of city-supplied water was limiting customers.

"We are getting water tankers from NGOs, but we need the state-supplied water to be back so all the people will come back to their homes," he said, referring to aid organizations.

Though government officials recently put forth a $100 billion, 10-year plan for reconstructing the country, they are short on funds. The International Monetary Fund in 2016 provided more than $5 billion in emergency loans to shore up Iraq's economy and to rebuild key cities destroyed by fighting. But it wasn't enough.

The government will need hundreds of millions of dollars to rebuild and compensate residents who lost their homes, businesses and factories in Mosul. But Iraq's economy has been badly battered in three years of war against Islamic State and the government has only a fraction of what it needs to repair the city.

"What we have now is nothing. We need an emergency budget for rebuilding Mosul, and international aid," said Mr. Abbar, the provincial official. "For 2017, Nineveh province's budget was $40 million. By my estimation what we need only for the restoration of infrastructure and basic services is more than $500 million."

A committee of local and federal government officials is organizing the massive task of cataloging and verifying damage to homes and businesses, but it is a preliminary step. A 2009 federal law promises Iraqis compensation for damage caused by terror attacks or military operations.

While life in Mosul's eastern half largely returned to normal after it was retaken by Iraqi forces in January, months of fierce fighting continued to dislodge entrenched militants from densely populated western neighborhoods, including stiff resistance this week during its last stand in the historic Old City.

Islamic State took control of Mosul in the summer of 2014, seizing about one-third of Iraq. The northern city, once home to some two million people, became its stronghold in Iraq. Even after its defeat in Mosul, the group still controls a few towns in Iraq, a stretch of the border with Syria and much of the oil-rich eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour.

Some Mosul residents had already begun returning to help in the cleanup and to begin to rebuild even before Mosul's full recapture this week.

In the Jadida neighborhood of western Mosul, Hassan Falah, 20, stacked broken blocks of concrete last week at his family's house, whose roof and third story were blown off. He and his extended family are hoping for government aid for rebuilding, but they aren't waiting for it to come. They built the multifamily structure themselves decades ago, and they can build it again, he said.

"After what we saw under Daesh, we never hoped to survive," he said, recounting how his family and neighbors hid out in the basement as the battle raged above them. "We were given a new life after liberation."

Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq, and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Karen Leigh at karen.leigh@wsj,com and Asa Fitch at asa.fitch@wsj.com

Related

* Iran Poised to Gain as \b ISIS\b0  Falls in Mosul

* Iraqi Prime Minister Praises Forces' Near-Ouster of Islamic State From Mosul

* With \b ISIS\b0  on the Run, an Unexpected Leader Emerges in Iraq

* Iraq's Dilemma: Who Will Lead the Next Big Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 ?

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b002xm
