Markets
Iraq Set to Raise $1 Billion in Bond Sale; First independent international bond sale in more than a decade for war-racked country

By Nikhil Lohade in Dubai 
653 words
2 August 2017
22:59
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraq is set to raise $1 billion through its first independent international bond sale in more than a decade, bankers aware of the transaction said on Wednesday, as the war-torn country looks for cash to support its finances.

The country is one of the biggest producers of oil globally, but a sharp fall in the price of crude in recent years has weighed heavily on its petrodollar-dependent economy, which is also suffering from the war with Islamic State militants.

The bonds due in 2023 are set to yield 6.75%, tighter than the initial price guidance of more than 7%, after banks marketing the deal had received orders worth more than $6.6 billion by Wednesday afternoon.

The cash will help plug the country's budget deficit, which the International Monetary Fund expects to be 5.1% of gross domestic product in 2017.

Citigroup, Deutsche Bank and J.P. Morgan are joint lead managers on the deal, while Trade Bank of Iraq is co-manager for the bond issue.

Iraq last sold bonds worth $1 billion in January but that issue was backed by the U.S. It attempted to sell bonds last year as well as in 2015, but ditched those plans after investors demanded a higher yield. It last issued bonds on its own in 2006, raising $2.7 billion due in 2028.

The new bond issue doesn't have a U.S. guarantee, but analysts expected the appetite to be high for its yield, which is attractive compared with those of similarly rated countries. Fitch and S&P both have assigned Iraq a B- rating.

The final yield "was bang in line with our expectations," said Stuart Culverhouse, head of fixed income research at Exotix Capital. "Investors like emerging markets at the moment for yield, and see Iraq as having decent yield given strong international support for the country," he added.

Iraq's bond issue comes just a week after Greece sold € billion ($3.56 billion) of 2022 bonds and after Argentina raised $2.75 billion of debt with a 100-year maturity in June, reflecting investor hunger for yield despite the higher risk.

Analysts say Iraq's new bond issue also comes at a good time for the country, with oil prices steadying around $50 a barrel and the International Monetary Fund backing the country's efforts to revive the economy. Baghdad last year agreed to a $5.34 billion loan facility with the IMF to support Iraq's economic reforms.

"The economic policies implemented by the Iraqi authorities to deal with the shocks facing Iraq—he armed conflict with ISIS and the ensuing humanitarian crisis and the collapse in oil prices—re appropriate," David Lipton, the IMF's first deputy managing director, said Tuesday after the IMF completed a review of the country's economy.

The IMF said the reforms process has been slow in some key areas but understandings have been reached on sufficient corrective actions in 2017-18 to keep the Iraqi program on track.

Anthony Antonelli, director at Greylock Capital in New York, bought the bonds, in part because Iraq's program with the IMF caps the rest of the year's financing. Robust demand for other recent deals, like Greece's, he said, indicated that there would be interest in the Iraqi bonds.

"They're putting in reforms, in full compliance with the IMF, they defeated ISIS in Mosul, and oil sentiment is greatly improved over several weeks ago," he said.

Mr. Antonelli said the bonds were already trading higher in the gray market.

Emese Bartha in Frankfurt, Christopher Whittall in London and Julie Wernau in New York contributed to this article.

Write to Nikhil Lohade at Nikhil.Lohade@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170802ed820053e
