World News: Australia Charges Two in Bomb Plot

By Rob Taylor 
379 words
5 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CANBERRA, Australia -- Police said two men facing terrorism charges in Australia were involved in an aborted attempt to place an improvised explosive device on an Etihad Airways flight out of Sydney last month, in a plot directed by Islamic State.

One of the men, a 49-year-old from Sydney, brought the device to the airport in a piece of luggage that he had asked his brother to take with him on the July 15 flight -- without telling the brother the bag contained explosives, Federal Police Deputy Commissioner Michael Phelan said Friday.

For reasons still unclear, Mr. Phelan said, the man left the airport with the bag, and his brother continued onto the flight without it. "This is one of the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil," he said.

Khaled Khayat, 49, and Mahmoud Khayat, 32, were charged with two counts of planning a terrorist act. They were refused bail and the case has been adjourned until November. Their lawyer, Michael Coroneos, told reporters outside a Sydney court that the men were "entitled to the presumption of innocence."

Khaled Khayat's brother hasn't been charged because police believe he had no idea the bag contained explosives, Mr. Phelan said.

After the initial bid failed, the two men changed tactics and were in the early stages of devising a "chemical-dispersion device" designed to release toxic hydrogen sulfide in a crowded area, police said.

Authorities believe both plots been planned with the help of a senior Islamic State member who sent the components for the device to the men in Sydney via air cargo from Turkey.

"The explosive was a high-end explosive, high military-grade explosive," Mr. Phelan said. "With assistancefrom the ISIL commander, the accused assembled the IED, the components, into what we believe was a functioning IED to be placed on that flight."

The allegation that Islamic State was able to ship explosives to Australia undetected was troubling, Mr. Phelan acknowledged. Turkish Embassy officials in Canberra declined to comment on how the material may have left the country

Etihad had no comment, but earlier this week said it was assisting Australian police.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170805ed850001w
