Markets
U.S. Government Bonds Consolidate Gains Ahead of Long Weekend; Yields on 10-year note fall as low as 2.218% overnight, lowest intraday level since Nov. 17

By Sam Goldfarb 
722 words
13 April 2017
20:37
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. government bond yields are in retreat, leaving their previous range behind and falling back to levels not seen since shortly after the November election.

After bouncing back and forth between 2.3% and 2.6% since mid-December, the yield on the 10-year note is now comfortably below 2.3%.

President Donald Trump's comments that he favors a weaker dollar and low interest-rates caused yields to drop sharply Wednesday afternoon after normal U.S. trading hours. The 10-year yield fell to around 2.20% from 2.294% at its 3 p.m. settlement.

Overnight, the yield fell as low as 2.218%, its lowest intraday level since Nov. 17, and it settled Thursday at 2.237% as the bond market closed an hour early ahead of the long holiday weekend.

Yields fall when bond prices rise.

In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Trump said the U.S. dollar "is getting too strong" and that he likes "low-interest policy." He also left open the possibility of renominating Federal Reserve Chairwoman Janet Yellen when her term runs out next year, a shift from his campaign when he said he would "most likely" not appoint her to a second term.

Mr. Trump's control over the Fed is officially limited to whom he nominates to its board of governors. Still, his interest in keeping rates low was still favorable to bonds, the values of which are diminished by higher interest rates.

Along with changing his position on Ms. Yellen, Mr. Trump also shifted his view on the U.S. Export-Import Bank, which he now supports, and on China, which he said wouldn't be labeled as a currency manipulator.

The abrupt reversals appeared to unsettle some investors, who have been betting that Mr. Trump can boost economic growth and inflation by following through on promises to cut taxes and increase spending on infrastructure.

"When you have that type of shift, the question becomes...how much more 180 degree turns are we going to have?" said Gene Tannuzzo, senior portfolio manager at Columbia Threadneedle,

Following the election, investors piled into assets that would benefit from rising growth and inflation while fleeing assets, such as government bonds, that would be hurt by those outcomes. The 10-year yield rose above 2% from 1.867% the day after the election and reached 2.6% by mid-December.

For much of this year, longer-term bond yields have been in a holding pattern, dipping when investors grew frustrated by the slow pace of policy-making in Washington and rising when it seemed like progress was being made in Congress or the Fed was ready to accelerate the pace of its interest-rate increases.

Over the past week, bonds have gotten an extra boost from geopolitical developments, including rising tensions between the U.S. and Russia over the Syrian conflict and between the U.S. and North Korea amid efforts to thwart that country's nuclear threat. Reports Thursday that the U.S. had dropped its largest nonnuclear bomb on an ISIS tunnel complex in Afghanistan added to anxieties, causing bonds to rally again after a modest selloff earlier in the day.

Investors have also become increasingly concerned about the state of France's presidential election, where the far-left candidate Jean-Luc Méenchon has been rising in the polls, turning the contest into a four-way race in which two of the candidates are deeply skeptical of the European Union.

Some analysts and investors believe yields are bound to recover in the coming months, as long as there isn't a surprise in the French election and the Fed officials stick to their projection of two more rate increases this year.

"I'm inclined to think that we're in a temporary blip stage," said Thomas Simons, senior vice president and money-market economist in the fixed income group at Jefferies LLC. As the Fed's June policy meeting approaches, officials will likely try to prepare the market for another rate increase, causing yields to rise, Mr. Simons said.

Write to Sam Goldfarb at sam.goldfarb@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d005em
