Politics
Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market; Move comes as president says he is considering discontinuing payments to insurers

By Michelle Hackman 
909 words
14 April 2017
00:43
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he Trump administration took steps on Thursday to stabilize the Affordable Care Act's individual health-care market, as insurers demand more certainty from the administration before deciding whether to remain in the law's marketplaces next year.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, a division of the Department of Health and Human Services, published its final rule aimed at steadying the individual market, which has seen large premium increases and insurers retreating from unprofitable markets across the country.

President Donald Trump's administration is pitching the move as a temporary fix, while it continues to work with Congress to strike an elusive deal to dismantle large portions of the health law known as Obamacare. But after GOP leaders yanked their health plan off the House floor late last month, the administration's moves to either bolster or undercut the existing health-care law have come under increased scrutiny.

"We are pleased to see the steps the administration is taking to stabilize the marketplace," said Justine Handelman, a senior vice president at the Blue Cross Blue Shield Association. "These rules are important to ensuring people maintain their coverage year-round, which is critical to hold down costs for everyone."

The final rule doesn't address the cost-sharing subsidies paid by the government to insurers, the fate of which has been a primary source of anxiety for insurers as they weigh their options for 2018.

The rule introduces several targeted changes aimed at curbing some of the losses insurers have faced in the law's exchanges. It shortens the 2018 open enrollment sign-up period to six weeks from three months and introduces stricter limits on when people can obtain coverage through the exchanges outside of that open enrollment period. It also ends a practice advanced by former President Barack Obama's administration of allowing people to sign up for new coverage if they have overdue premium payments.

The federal government would end its review of health plans on the exchange to ensure they have broad enough network coverage, leaving that oversight to the states. And in a controversial move, it would give insurers more flexibility to cover less of consumers' total-benefit costs. Critics say that will hurt enrollment and could spur lawsuits over the rule.

Those moves could help increase predictability for insurers and provide them more income from customers who sign up. It also creates some political cover for Republicans, who recognize that any future unraveling in the health-care market could carry political repercussions.

Timothy Jost, a law professor at Washington and Lee University and an expert on the health law, said the move to curtail the open enrollment period may deter younger consumers, the precise population insurers are trying to entice, because they historically sign up toward the end of the window.

"This very well may make things worse rather than better for consumers and for insurers," he said.

But any reassuring signal the rule might send has been overshadowed by comments from Mr. Trump, who told The Wall Street Journal in an interview on Wednesday that he is considering discontinuing the health law's payments to insurers, which are projected to total $7 billion in 2017, as leverage to force Democrats to negotiate a larger health-care overhaul package. Abruptly stopping the payments would likely trigger an insurance meltdown.

"Obamacare is dead next month if it doesn't get that money," Mr. Trump said. "I haven't made my viewpoint clear yet."

The payments, which the administration sends directly to insurers to lower out-of-pocket costs for low-income consumers, are the subject of litigation brought by House Republican leadership against Mr. Obama's administration.

A federal judge ruled in 2016 that the payments were unconstitutional, but allowed them to continue while Mr. Obama's administration pursued an appeal. After Mr. Trump's election in November, Republicans requested and received a delay in the case. The court is slated to revisit the lawsuit on May 22.

Meanwhile, an array of health-care industry groups representing insurance companies, hospitals, doctors and employers is ratcheting up pressure on the administration to continue the payments unabated. Insurers have said they need clarity on the issue before filing 2018 rates and plans with regulators in the next couple of months. Without the payments, the lobbying groups warn that premiums could rise sharply and many more insurers may pull out altogether.

"We are committed to working with you to deliver the short-term stability we all want and the affordable coverage and high-quality care that every American deserves. But time is short and action is needed," the groups wrote in a Wednesday letter to the president.

Stephanie Armour contributed to this article.

Write to Michelle Hackman at Michelle.Hackman@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  Tunnels in Afghanistan

* Donald Trump's Recent Policy Reversals Reflect Business Influence

* Trump Threatens to Withhold Payments to Insurers to Press Democrats on Health Bill

* U.S. Braces for Next Provocation From North Korea

* Trump Shifts Back to Health Care

* Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market

* In Ex-Im Bank Impasse, Trump Sides With Business Establishment

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d00b6t
