World News: Lebanon Seeks to Rebuild Saudi Alliance

By Margherita Stancati   
555 words
12 January 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

RIYADH, Saudi Arabia -- Lebanon's new Hezbollah-supported president is courting Saudi Arabia in an effort to restore billions in military aid, a delicate task as his country grows closer to Iran, the kingdom's main rival for Middle East power.

Michel Aoun's country has for years been a political battleground in the regional struggle between Iran, the backer of the Lebanese Shiite militant and political group Hezbollah, and Saudi Arabia, a supporter of the country's main Sunni bloc.

The ascendancy of Mr. Aoun, Hezbollah's main Christian ally, was a victory for the group -- and a sign of the waning influence in Lebanon of Saudi Arabia, which had opposed his candidacy.

Now, Mr. Aoun is reaching out to Riyadh in an effort to show that Lebanon hasn't fallen into Tehran's orbit. At stake for Beirut is around $3 billion worth of military aid that Saudi Arabia suspended last year in February in retaliation for Hezbollah's dominance of Lebanese politics.

The Lebanese leader visited Saudi Arabia this week to meet King Salman.

A top item on the agenda of Mr. Aoun's two-day trip, which ended Tuesday, was to persuade the Sunni kingdom to resume those payments, intended to purchase weapons and other equipment from France. Lebanon would also like Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies to lift a travel warning on the country that they issued last year.

"I am here to dispel ambiguities that arose, and carry affection and friendship for the Saudi people," Mr. Aoun told Saudi television channel Al Ekhbariya.

The Saudi government hasn't said whether it is considering restoring aid. Saudi officials didn't respond to requests to comment.

Securing such aid could help Lebanon contain the spillover from the war in neighboring Syria. Lebanon's army is battling extremists along the border affiliated with al Qaeda and Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"Lebanon's army is currently fighting ISIS on the Lebanese border, and it needs all the support it can get," said Lebanese lawmaker Alain Aoun, a nephew of the president.

As Riyadh became entangled with the wars in Yemen and Syria, where it backs opposite sides from Iran, Lebanon slid down the kingdom's list of priorities. Frustrated by Hezbollah's elevation into the country's most powerful military and political force in recent years, Riyadh has punished Lebanon economically, instructing its deep-pocketed citizens to avoid traveling to the country.

But disengaging from Lebanon has come at a political cost. The backing of Hezbollah -- which Saudi Arabia and the U.S. consider a terrorist organization -- helped Mr. Aoun secure the votes he needed in parliament to be elected president.

Under established power-sharing agreements in Lebanon, the president is always a Maronite Christian, the prime minister is Sunni and the speaker of parliament a Shiite.

Saudi Minister of State Thamer al-Sabhan, who has spearheaded the kingdom's re-engagement with Lebanon, said Saudi Arabia hopes to see a strong government contain the influence of Hezbollah and Iran.

Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah last month said his party didn't oppose Mr. Aoun's outreach to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries.

---

Noam Raydan in Beirut contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170112ed1c0001c
