World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,285 words
15 September 2017
12:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Terror on the Tube

An explosion hit a London subway train Friday morning, injuring 18 people, in what police are treating as a terrorist incident. Police said an improvised explosive device detonated on the train at Parsons Green station in West London. Witnesses described a burst of flames and scenes of panic during the morning rush. Emergency services said none of the injured are in serious or life-threatening condition. London's top counterterrorism police officer said most of the injuries were flash burns.

The GOP Resistance

Top congressional Republicans signaled Thursday they wouldn't be pressured into enacting an immigration framework reached between President Trump and top Democrats, as conservatives reacted with alarm to reports of a fledgling deal to protect young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children. The framework marked the second time in a week that Mr. Trump bypassed his party and dealt directly with Democrats. The president, who ran on a hard-line immigration platform, jolted many of his own supporters by agreeing to pair legal status for the group of young people—ften called "Dreamers"—ith enhanced border-security measures. Mr. Trump also agreed that the package would omit funding for his promised wall on the border with Mexico. He said nothing about including other enforcement measures aimed at finding and deporting people living illegally in the U.S. After President Trump said House Speaker Paul Ryan and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell were "on board" with his approach, the GOP leaders said negotiations would take on a broad set of immigration issues, including enforcement measures beyond border security.

Soft Money

SoftBank is nearing an ambitious deal to take a substantial stake in Uber—ut only if the Japanese technology investor can persuade shareholders to sell enough stock at a steep discount. After weeks of deliberation, Uber's board in recent days has been hashing out its response to a potential investment led by SoftBank that could total as much as $10 billion. If successful, that would be among the largest single investments in a private venture-backed startup. It would also give SoftBank—hose chief executive, Masayoshi Son, has predicted that companies such as Uber will transform the world—ajor stakes in nearly all the world's top ride-hailing companies. Elsewhere, Google parent Alphabet has held talks to invest about $1 billion in Lyft, which would further an alliance against Uber.

Missile Launch

For the second time in a month, North Korea fired a missile over Japan, defying rising international efforts to force it to abandon course. In a rare move, South Korea responded by immediately conducting a simulated strike of the North Korean launch site, an air base near Pyongyang. In Japan, alerts were sent early Friday local time to smartphones of people living in areas where the missile was projected to pass over soon after the launch had been detected. No injuries or damage were reported. The launch was of a shorter-range projectile that wouldn't be able to reach the U.S. mainland. The U.N. Security Council will hold an emergency meeting Friday at the request of the U.S. and Japan. A new violation by Pyongyang had been anticipated in response to the Security Council's adoption of new sanctions Monday, some diplomats said, raising the stakes for finding a diplomatic solution.

Style Icons

This weekend, Jared Leto stars on the cover of WSJ. Magazine's September Men's Style issue. From what is referred to as his base— 100,000-square-foot decommissioned Air Force station he converted into a private residence—he actor, tech entrepreneur, stadium-filling rock star, fashion icon and successful Silicon Valley investor brings us inside his highflying life. Also in the issue, an exclusive tour of Palais de la Zahia, French iconoclast Bernard-Henri Léy's sprawling riad in the heart of the medina in Marrakesh, Morocco; the late Pierre Bergé on partner Yves Saint Laurent's legacy; a look inside the world's first major museum devoted to contemporary African art; Nathalie Du Pasquier, a founder of the Memphis Group, finally gets her due; dancer and choreographer Benjamin Millepied takes us through his day; the resurgence of modernist pioneers Anni and Josef Albers; and a new film from artist Alex Israel. Plus, the future of Rag & Bone under co-founder Marcus Wainwright, a whimsical fashion portfolio inspired by decades past and the latest in streetwear.

Today's Video

Mission Accomplished

After 20 years in space, the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft will make its suicide plunge into Saturn's atmosphere Friday. For the team of scientists who began working on the project in the 1980s, it means the end of decades of work that led to scientific progress and never-before-seen images of Saturn's rings, moons and surface.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

House, Senate Tax Proposals Likely to Diverge

An Illinois City Aims to Move Better Policing Right Into the Neighborhood

WORLD

Central Banks Edge Away From Easy Money as BOE Signals Rate Rise

\b ISIS\b0  Convoy Reaches Militant-Held Syria After Coalition Stops Strikes, Activists Say

BUSINESS

The Second-Class Office Workers

Verizon Looks to Cut $10 Billion in Costs by 2021

MARKETS

Florida Is Short on Insurance Adjusters, and That Could Stall Recovery Efforts

Some Equifax Customers Who Sought Safety Got Burned in the Data Breach

Number of the Day

22

The number of consecutive games the Cleveland Indians have won, after a thrilling 3-2 victory over the Kansas City Royals on Thursday night that featured a dramatic comeback and extra-inning heroics. The Indians are now chasing the 1916 New York Giants' all-time streak of 26 games.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on North Korea's firing of another missile over Japan? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the immigration agreement taking shape between Democrats and President Trump, Penny Freimark of New Jersey said: "It should be no deal unless the Democrats are willing to fund a wall…e would just have more illegal aliens enter our country. What kind of compromise would that be? Mr. Trump had better stay firm on his promise." Catherine Learoyd of Texas shared: "The wall of water we've just experienced in Harvey and Irma should have our priority, not a wall of hate and exclusion. It is high time to get DACA settled and move on to rebuilding our soggy infrastructure." And Daniel Souza of Connecticut commented: "Hooray! Finally, the longstanding and maddening logjam in Washington could be broken. We need to get things going, one way or another, whatever it takes. For critics of Mr. Trump like myself, he could very well turn out to be the broken clock that still tells the right times twice a day."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170915ed9f0018k
