Reader Center
11 of Our Best Weekend Reads

By KALY SOTO 
584 words
18 November 2017
13:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

So much great journalism, so little time. It’ a modern problem, but this is the weekend. Sit back, relax, get another cup of coffee and lose yourself in one, two or 11 great stories.

‘he Lion King’ffect

Over 20 years, hundreds of South African performers have joined the musical in cities around the globe, The New York Times theater reporter Michael Paulson writes. Many play Rafiki, often learning to sing in languages not their own. Here are some of their stories, laced with hope, tragedy, homesickness and triumph. Arts & Leisure

Mother Knows Best

The Vanity Fair columnist James Wolcott looks at two portraits of modern matriarchy, reviewing Ivana Trump’ new book “aising Trump”nd “he Kardashians: An American Dream”y Jerry Oppenheimer. Book Review

The Uncounted

An on-the-ground investigation reveals that the United States-led battle against ISIS —ailed as the most precise air campaign in history —s killing far more Iraqi civilians than the coalition has acknowledged. The New York Times Magazine

Battlefield New York

With old maps in one hand and Google Maps in the other, the author Russell Shorto roams across the city’ five boroughs, searching for remnants of the American Revolution. Travel

My Thanksgiving

Behind the collective feast and public ritual is a personal dimension: the holiday as each of us has lived it, laughed about it, imagined it or reinvented it. Nine accomplished writers, including Wesley Morris, Masha Gessen, Elliot Ackerman and Jessica B. Harris, share their stories of the holiday.

And don’ forget to check out our feature The 400-Degree Thanksgiving, where Sam Sifton and Melissa Clark cook a feast in just eight hours. Food

A Hedge Fund Manager’ Escape Plan

Philip Baker admitted that he had defrauded his hedge fund clients. He was sentenced to 20 years in federal prison. Then he devised an escape plan. Business Sunday

For the First Family of Pleasure Products, Toys Are Us

Once sold in seedy bookstores, sex toys are now a chic, “ade in America”usiness, instilling customers with brand loyalty. Sunday Styles

The Doyenne of DNA Says: Just Chillax With Your Ex

“f we’e going to live to 150 years, the reality that you’e going to be with one person for 100 years is low,”Anne Wojcicki, the founder of 23andMe, says. Sunday Styles

Trillions of Flies Can’ All Be Bad

The world’ flies do much more than annoy us. Pollinating plants, cleaning up carcasses, swabbing drains —they're part of every strand of the web of life. Science

A Big N.F.L. Game Comes to Mexico City. These Guys Have It Covered.

The podcast Primero y Diez, or First and 10, exemplifies the passion for American football in Mexico and the kind of fans the league is cultivating. Sports

Overnight in Walmart Parking Lots: Silence, Solace and Refuge

Walmart’ practice of letting people populate many of its parking lots has made the retail giant’ stores a reliable destination and a place where an informal culture emerges before and after dark.

Brinkhoff Mogenbur | Eric Yahnker | Giles Price for The New York Times | De Agostini Picture Library/Getty Images | Melina Hammer for The New York Times | Aaron Vincent Elkaim for The New York Times | Graham Walzer for The New York Times | Peter Prato for The New York Times | Natural History Museum, London | Rebecca Blackwell/Associated Press | George Etheredge for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171118edbi002s1
