World; Middle East
Fears Grow That U.S. Is Inching Toward Bigger Role in Syria War

By HELENE COOPER 
1,216 words
23 June 2017
02:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —o hear the Pentagon tell it, the United States still has no intention of getting involved in Syria’ six-year civil war; the American presence there is solely to help its allies defeat the Islamic State.

But a recent spate of incidents have sparked alarm from diplomats and national security officials that the United States may be inadvertently sliding into a far bigger role in the Syrian civil war than it intended.

“e don’ seek conflict with anyone other than \b ISIS\b0 ,”apt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said on Wednesday, using an acronym for the militant Sunni extremist group that is rooted in Syria and Iraq.

This month alone, the United States has shot down a Syrian warplane, came close to shooting another and downed two Iranian-made drones that were nearing American-backed troops on the ground.

Russia has retaliated by threatening to treat American planes as targets; in a dramatic Top-Gun style maneuver on Monday, one of Moscow’ jets buzzed within five feet of an American spy plane.

None of these encounters involved the Islamic State. The contradiction opens a larger question, national security experts say, of what kind of broader strategy the Trump administration plans once the Islamic State —ow on the defensive —s defeated in Syria.

With each episode, “e own more of the conflict in Syria without articulating a strategy,”aid Vali Nasr, dean of the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies. “e are sleepwalking into a much broader military mandate, without saying what we plan to do afterward.”

American military gains in Syria have far outpaced any diplomacy toward a political settlement of the Syrian civil war.

When President Barack Obama first began airstrikes against Islamic State targets in Syria three years ago, the instructions to the Pentagon seemed clear: Defeat the Islamic State through alliances with Syrians who oppose the brutal extremist group, but don’ help them fight President Bashar al-Assad.

The Islamic State is now reeling in Syria. It has been battered by strikes from a host of enemies, from the United States and its regional allies to the Syrian government that is backed by Russia and Iran. It no longer holds one-third of the country, according to American officials who say that the group has lost around half of the territory it once controlled.

In past years, the Pentagon and its allies could stay out of the Syrian government’ way —nd that of Mr. Assad’ backers in Russia and Iran —s all fought the Islamic State. Now, all sides are converging on a smaller piece of territory, resulting in competing forces increasingly turning on one another, in addition to the common enemy.

Captain Davis, at the Pentagon, noted that when American-backed ground troops are confronted by “rmed drones, that leaves us with no choice but to defend ourselves and our partners.”

He said that the downing of an Iranian-made drone this week was done in self-defense. Defense officials insist that doesn’ amount to a greater United States involvement in the broader war.

But privately, American military officials acknowledge that they are quickly running out of space in Syria to stay out of Mr. Assad’ way —ot to mention Russia and Iran.

In Europe, the new president of France announced he would be taking a distinctly different tack on Syria than his predecessor. Emmanuel Macron said that getting rid of Mr. Assad was no longer a top priority.

Instead, Mr. Macron said, getting rid of terrorists is more important —nd he is prepared to work with anyone toward that end, including Moscow.

“he real change I’e made on this question is that I haven’ said the deposing of Bashar al-Assad is a prerequisite for everything,”r. Macron said in an interview with European newspapers, according to Agence France-Presse.

“y line is clear: One, a total fight against terrorist groups. They are our enemies ... We need the cooperation of everyone to eradicate them, particularly Russia,”r. Macron said. “wo, stability in Syria, because I don’ want a failed state.”

He also said he was looking for a “olitical and diplomatic road map”ut did not mention the United States or the United Nations.

That suggested that he would like to see the leading European Union countries play a larger role —ot on the ground, but in diplomacy and the effort to to disentangle the warring parties.

But at the moment there are no ongoing talks among the major parties over what to do once the Islamic State is defeated in Syria.

And with the fight now intensifying in eastern Syria’ Euphrates River Valley —ome to oil reserves and water —efense officials say that they are bracing for Mr. Assad and his backers to go all-out to reclaim that territory from the Islamic State.

Iran, in particular, does not want American-backed forces to take that ground for concern it would complicate Tehran’ supply line to Shiite allies in neighboring Iraq and Lebanon.

“he Obama administration’ policy, which was to focus solely on ISIS, kept the harder question about what to do about Russia and Iran and Assad off the table for a long time,”aid Eric Robinson, a research programmer and analyst with the RAND Corporation. “hat was doable in the beginning.”

But, he added that “s ISIS is pushed out of northern Syria and Raqqa, and things are pushed into the middle Euphrates River Valley, we will see everyone focusing their attention on the same area.”

That, he said, will increase the chances of more episodes like the ones of the past month.

In turn, that could spark a larger conflict, particularly given that Russia has never been shy about escalation, and Mr. Trump is widely viewed as more quick to act than his predecessor.

“ne of the last things Obama wanted was to get into a shooting war with Russia over Syria,”aid Derek Chollet, Mr. Obama’ assistant secretary of defense for international affairs. “he risk of escalation with Russia was a constant factor in the administration’ planning and management of the military campaign.”

A big challenge, he said, is that Moscow likes “scalation dominance.”e characterized that as Russia’ willingness to risk more, even to its own detriment, to save Mr. Assad than the United States is willing to risk to take him out.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

* Trump Gives Mattis Authority to Send More Troops to Afghanistan

* American Warplane Shoots Down Iranian-Made Drone Over Syria

A fighter jet landing on the U.S.S. George H.W. Bush aircraft carrier in the Mediterranean Sea on Thursday. This month alone, the United States has shot down a Syrian warplane, came close to shooting another and downed two Iranian-made drones that were nearing American-backed troops on the ground. | Bram Janssen/Associated Press | Ben C. Solomon, a Times video journalist, tells the story of Major Sajjad al-Hour as he leads 150 men through the war-torn streets of Mosul. | By BEN C. SOLOMON and TAIGE JENSEN 

Document NYTFEED020170623ed6n0002t
