U.S. Drops 'Mother' Bomb On  ISIS  in Afghanistan

By Jessica Donati, Ben Kesling and Dion Nissenbaum 
1,048 words
14 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military dropped one of the largest nonnuclear bombs in its arsenal Thursday on an Islamic State tunnel-and-cave complex in eastern Afghanistan, the Pentagon said.

A U.S. plane dropped the nearly 22,000-pound Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb -- nicknamed the Mother of All Bombs -- just a few days after an American Special Forces soldier was killed during a joint U.S.-Afghan offensive against dug-in Islamic State positions in the same area.

"We have been waiting months to use it," said an allied official in Afghanistan. "I think the loss of our soldier helped motivate leaders to approve it."

The bomb is a precision-guided "smart bomb" designed to cause maximum damage to bunkers, tunnels and other areas that can typically withstand even large standard bombs or artillery strikes.

President Donald Trump suggested Thursday that he had not personally been involved in the decision to use the giant bomb, which is deployed by parachute from the rear ramp of a transport plane. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

Still, the use of the bomb by the military comes at a time when new military tactics are being used in other long-running foreign-policy challenges. Last week, for instance, the U.S. military, in a move approved by the president, fired 59 Tomahawk missiles onto a Syrian airfield -- the first time the U.S. has directly attacked the Syrian regime after years of war there. And in the western Pacific, a U.S. aircraft carrier -- and, Mr. Trump has said, a nuclear-powered submarine -- were directed to waters off Korea as a show of force to North Korea. The allied official in Afghanistan said, however, that the use of the big bomb wasn't designed as a message to Pyongyang.

Mr. Trump, when asked if the action served as a warning to North Korea, said: "I don't know if this sends a message, it doesn't make any difference if it does or not. North Korea is a problem, the problem will be taken care of."

The incident comes as Afghan and U.S. troops continue to fight a two-front war in Afghanistan, fending off attacks from the Taliban, who ran the country until late 2001, and Islamic State, which arrived in 2014. The two insurgent forces sometimes clash with each other and sometimes work in tandem.

Islamic State fighters have largely been holed up in Kunar and Nangarhar provinces, along the mountainous Pakistan border. "As [Islamic State's] losses have mounted, they are using [improvised bombs], bunkers and tunnels to thicken their defense," said U.S. Gen. John Nicholson, commander of allied forces in Afghanistan. "This is the right munition to reduce these obstacles and maintain the momentum of our offensive against" Islamic State.

Gen. Nicholson didn't require special permission to deploy the giant bomb, said a spokesman for U.S. forces in Afghanistan. The Afghan Ministry of Defense didn't know about the bomb strike, a ministry spokesman said.

There are currently around 8,500 American troops in Afghanistan, many of them Green Berets and other special-operations forces. Another 6,000 or so allied forces remain. The U.S. and its allies invaded Afghanistan in 2001 after concluding that the Taliban had allowed Osama bin Laden to plan the Sept. 11 attacks from sanctuary on Afghan soil. At one point there were more than 100,000 U.S. troops in the country.

The tempo of U.S. and Afghan operations against Islamic State has stepped up in recent weeks. U.S. and Afghan commandos are carrying out a 10-day offensive in Nangarhar province, where Islamic State retains its strongest presence in the country.

That operation cost the life of Staff Sgt. Mark De Alencar, a 37-year-old Green Beret from Edgewood, Md., who was killed in a firefight in Nangarhar on April 8, according to the military.

U.S. officials said Sgt. De Alencar's death was very much on their minds when commanders decided to escalate the air campaign.

"We lost a soldier because of the booby traps and [improvised explosive devices] around caves," said the allied official. "We will lose Afghan and U.S. lives trying to clear those caves."

White House press secretary Sean Spicer said the attack took place around 7 p.m. local time in Afghanistan. "We targeted a system of tunnels and caves that [Islamic State] fighters used to move around freely," Mr. Spicer said.

The U.S. military has been bombing Islamic State positions in the area almost daily for more than a year, but the rate of such strikes has increased dramatically since Mr. Trump took office in January. The past two months have seen the greatest number of bombs dropped in Afghanistan since 2013, according to U.S. Air Force data. A large proportion of these munitions have been dropped over Islamic State strongholds.

While the U.S. is concerned about Islamic State in Afghanistan, the military's main focus remains the resurgent Taliban, which poses a more existential threat to the U.S.-allied Kabul government. "The Taliban remains the priority, but certainly we want [Islamic State] to know that they're not welcome," said a senior U.S. military official.

The caves targeted on Thursday are about 250 yards long and were excavated by local villagers mining a semiprecious stone in the mountainside, according to Bilal Sarwary, an Afghan journalist who visited the area last year.

---

Carol E. Lee and Habib Khan Totakhil contributed to this article.

---

MOAB Was Aimed

At Deterrence, Too

The 'Mother of All Bombs' was intended to be used in combat, but it was also designed just to sit there. The mere existence of the weapon was supposed to serve as a psychological weapon, its sheer size acting to deter enemies.

The weapon is designed to explode in the air over a target, and doesn't penetrate into the ground before exploding. The Massive Ordnance Penetrator -- the largest nonnuclear weapon in the arsenal -- is designed to burrow into the ground on impact before detonating.

-- Ben Kesling