The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Donald Trump Jr.’ Deadline

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
621 words
12 July 2017
11:44
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

It was Tuesday morning. The New York Times had emails between Donald Trump Jr. and a trusted intermediary about setting up a meeting to discuss information that “ould incriminate Hillary and her dealings with Russia and would be very useful to your father.”

The reporters working on the article called Donald Trump Jr. for comment, telling him that he had until 11 a.m. to comment. An hour before that deadline, he gave a statement —on Twitter and to the world.

On today’ episode:

•att Apuzzo, one of the reporters who has been investigating the ties between the Trump campaign and Russia, discusses unearthing Donald Trump Jr.’ emails and demystifies the term “ollusion.”

•e hear from Rukmini Callimachi and her producer, Andy Mills, as they travel through the streets of Mosul in the hours after the Iraqi government declared victory over Islamic State militants.

Background reading:

•ussian dirt on Clinton? “I love it,”Donald Trump Jr. said in an email.

•Photographs of what \b ISIS\b0  left behind in Mosul.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

“his is obviously very high level and sensitive information but is part of Russia and its government’ support for Mr. Trump,”he email to Donald Trump Jr. said. “f it’ what you say I love it,”e replied. | Matt York/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170712ed7c001xh
