World News: Iraq Military Blames  ISIS  for Civilian Deaths

By Tamer El-Ghobashy and Ali A. Nabhan 
659 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

HAMAM AL-ALIL, Iraq -- The Iraqi military said Sunday a blast that killed scores of civilians in western Mosul was triggered by an Islamic State booby trap, contradicting local officials and residents who claimed a U.S.-led coalition airstrike caused the deaths.

The Iraqi military statement, based on an initial assessment, came a day after the U.S.-led coalition acknowledged it carried out an airstrike on March 17 at the request of Iraqi security forces against Islamic State fighters in western Mosul. The location corresponded to allegations of mass casualties.

The coalition, which is backing Iraqi troops that are engaged in fierce fighting to retake the entire city from Islamic State, said it is investigating to determine if the strike caused several houses to collapse, trapping what local officials said could be up to 200 people.

It wasn't possible to independently verify the cause of the blast.

On Sunday, an official with Iraq's civil-defense authority said it had recovered 172 victims so far from a cluster of collapsed homes in the Mosul al-Jadeeda neighborhood that is at the center of the blast probe.

The blast, and the possible U.S.-led coalition role in it, has brought into focus the extreme dangers the latest push to root out Islamic State from Mosul poses to an estimated half million people believed to be trapped by the combat. Civilians face increasingly harrowing conditions -- with dwindling food, clean water and fuel supplies -- and those who flee often dodge crossfire between Islamic State and Iraqi forces.

After reaching a muddy field designated as a receiving center outside Mosul, Ahmed Khadim, from the Wadi Hajar district, spoke of hunger and the constant blasts that ruined his hearing.

"We were running out of food supplies day after day," said the 33-year-old motorcycle mechanic. "The whole family at some point shared just one loaf of bread."

Some 201,000 people have managed to escape western Mosul, according to the Iraqi government. Many have emerged with stories of leaving behind relatives buried under rubble from blasts -- whether militant bombs or mortars or government-allied strikes.

Iraqi troops have been battling Islamic State in western Mosul since mid-February, after wresting back eastern Mosul from the extremist group in late January. The overall campaign to recapture Mosul began in mid-October.

Iraq's government has refused to release casualty figures, but statistics compiled by independent groups have shown the battle for western Mosul has been far deadlier for civilians than in eastern Mosul. The Iraqi Observatory for Human Rights said since February 19, 3,864 civilians have been killed in the west, compared with 2,190 killed in the three months of fighting in the east.

Iraqi politicians have raised questions over the military tactics Iraq's security forces and their U.S.-led coalition advisers have employed in the heavily populated city. Iraq's speaker of parliament said the Mosul al-Jadeeda incident would be the subject of a special session this week. Iraq's defense ministry said it had launched a probe.

According to a U.S. military news release from March 17, the coalition conducted four strikes in Mosul targeting numerous Islamic State positions, weapons systems, vehicles and a car bomb.

The coalition's Saturday statement didn't specify which of those strikes was found to have taken place in Mosul al-Jadeeda. Local residents and officials said the civilian deaths were clustered in four homes, but the level of destruction made it difficult to determine which house was apparently targeted.

If confirmed that the strike killed the civilians, it would represent the largest death toll by a U.S.-led coalition airstrike since its air campaign against Islamic State began in August 2014.

---

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170327ed3r0001e
