Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest, Week 8 | What Interested You Most in The Times This Week?

By KATHERINE SCHULTEN 
853 words
4 August 2017
13:01
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Update: Winners for this week have been announced.

Welcome to Week 8 of our Summer Reading Contest, which runs until Aug. 24. What did you read, watch or listen to in The Times this week?

Whatever got your attention, just post a comment here by Aug. 11 at 7 a.m. Eastern and tell us all about it.

We hope you’l click around nytimes.com and find your own great articles, features and multimedia, but we know that not everyone who participates has a Times subscription. Because all links to Times content from our site are free, every week we try to help by posting interesting pieces from a variety of sections.

For example, this week you may have read front-page news articles like ...

Justice Dept. to Take On Affirmative Action in College Admissions

Scaramucci Is Out After Only 10 Days

Now Trump Targets Legal Immigration, Urging 50% Cut

Breakthrough Reported in Gene Editing in Human Embryo

Trump Signs Russian Sanctions Into Law

Or, maybe you found stories like these from the Style, Sports, International, Science, Education, Business, Arts, U.S. and sections:

Where All the School’ a Stage, and the List of Success Stories Is Long

Tesla Unveils $35,000 Model 3 Sedan

National Monuments: At Bears Ears in Utah, Heated Politics and Precious Ruins

How to Conquer the Admissions Essay

A Brief History of Emoji Art

Putin Bet That Trump Would Improve Ties. It’ Backfiring.

Is This Dog Dangerous? Shelters Struggle With Live-or-Die Tests

Affirmative Action Battle Has a New Focus: Asian-Americans

How to Survive a Rip Current: First, Don’ Fight It

China’ Internet Censors Play a Tougher Game of Cat and Mouse

The Art of the Taboo Podcast Interview

Venice, Invaded by Tourists, Risks Becoming ‘isneyland on the Sea’

A Solution to Hackers? More Hackers

In a Rohingya Refugee Camp, Soccer Is a Joyful Escape

Campus Political Fights Come Home for the Summer

Developmentally Disabled, and Going to College

In an Unused Harlem Church, a Towering Work of a ‘enius’

Kaepernick and Concussions Continue to Pose Problems for N.F.L.

Turning the Perverse Nature of ‘he Bachelor’nto Art

A Whaling Way of Life Under Threat

Where the Living Play Dead for a Day to Laugh in the Face of Death

Or, maybe you were more into multimedia like ...

Video | Iraq’ Hardball Tactics to Root Out \b ISIS\b0 

Infographic | It’ Not Your Imagination. Summers Are Getting Hotter.

Quiz | What Does Your Microbiome Say About You?

Op-Doc Video | Drive-In Jesus

Photos | Capturing Camaraderie in a Minor League Baseball Team

Infographic | Switching Careers Doesn’ Have to Be Hard: Charting Jobs That Are Similar to Yours

Photos | Poetry in Action

Or, you might be a fan of the Opinion section, finding pieces like ...

The Universe Doesn’ Care About Your ‘urpose’

How We Make Black Girls Grow Up Too Fast

The Past Week Proves That Trump Is Destroying Our Democracy

South Vietnam’ ‘aredevil Girls’

Of Course Abortion Should Be a Litmus Test for Democrats

Whatever caught your eye, tell us about it in the comments.

Need more details? The contest rules are all here, and you can read the work of last year’ winners here. A quick overview, though:

•ou can choose from anything published in the print paper or on NYTimes.com in 2017, including videos, graphics and photographs. (In your response, please include the URL or headline of the piece you pick.)

•e’l post this question each Friday from today through Aug. 18, and you’l have until the next Friday morning to respond with your picks. Then we’l close that post and open a new one with the same question.

•e’l choose at least one favorite answer to feature on our site each week. Winners from this week will be announced on Aug. 22.

•eel free to participate each week, but we allow only one submission per person per week.

•he contest is open to students ages 13 to 19 from anywhere in the world.

_________

While this is the only Student Opinion question we’l be asking this summer, here are 179 questions from this school year, all still open to comment.

Rowers along the Charles River passed the Harvard College campus in Cambridge, Mass., this year. A lawsuit accuses Harvard of discriminating against Asian-Americans in admissions. Related Article | Charles Krupa/Associated Press | The grandparents of the author of “he Universe Doesn’ Care About Your Purpose”ith their new ’2 Ford Thunderbird. | The New World School of the Arts, a small, rigorous magnet high school in Miami, draws a diverse group of talented actors, musicians, dancers and visual artists. Sit in on a few classes in 360 degrees. | By SCOTT MCINTYRE, NIKO KOPPEL and GUGLIELMO MATTIOLI | Some of the methods Iraqi authorities are using to weed out ISIS supporters among Sunni civilians in newly liberated Mosul have heightened concerns over human rights abuses. | By CAMILLA SCHICK and TIM ARANGO 

Document NYTFEED020170804ed840038s
