World
Map Said to Show Location of U.S. Forces in Syria Published in Turkey; U.S. decries release, warns of disruption in fight against Islamic State

By Dion Nissenbaum 
679 words
20 July 2017
00:17
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON— detailed map purportedly showing where U.S. forces are deployed in northern Syria was published by Turkey's state-run news agency, drawing a sharp retort and a warning from the Pentagon that the move could undermine the battle against Islamic State.

The U.S. government on Wednesday expressed its concerns to Turkish officials after Anadolu Agency released a lengthy article and a map it said showed the locations of 10 bases used by hundreds of U.S. forces in northern Syria battling Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

"The release of sensitive military information exposes coalition forces to unnecessary risk and has the potential to disrupt ongoing operations to defeat ISIS," the U.S. military said in a statement. "ISIS is the greatest threat to regional stability and it is critical that all parties operating in Syria remain focused on what is most important—he annihilation of ISIS."

Release of the map angered some U.S. officials, who privately expressed frustration that Turkey, a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ally, would threaten its relationship with Washington by allowing its state-run news agency to publish sensitive information.

"While we cannot independently verify the sources that contributed to this article, we would be very concerned if officials from a NATO ally would purposefully endanger our forces by releasing sensitive information," the Pentagon said. "We have conveyed these concerns to the government of Turkey."

Turkish officials didn't respond to requests for comment about the release of the information, which comes as the U.S. military is stepping up its efforts to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, its de facto capital in Syria.

Turkey and the U.S. remain at odds over Washington's decision to work in Syria with the Kurdish YPG militia. Turkish leaders consider the force a threat to their country and have expressed frustration that the Trump administration decided to step up its military cooperation with the YPG earlier this year.

Turkish officials see the YPG as an offshoot of the PKK, a Kurdish separatist force that the U.S. and Turkey both classify as a terrorist group. The U.S. treats the YPG as a distinct force from the PKK, allowing it to work with Kurdish fighters in Syria.

In May, President Donald Trump approved plans to directly arm the YPG for the first time, raising new concerns in Turkey that the weapons would be turned on Turkish soldiers fighting in Syria or smuggled across the border into Turkey.

The U.S. has tried to assuage Turkish concerns, but the issue remains a divisive one for the two countries.

Turkey has launched airstrikes on YPG positions in northern Syria and repeatedly turned its artillery on Kurdish forces. The U.S. responded by launching joint border patrols in April with the YPG, a move that helped temporarily defuse tensions.

While the Turkish news agency published the map, the German newspaper Bild released satellite imagery of what it said was a major U.S. base in northern Syria, a sprawling facility with a long runway, hangars, barracks and fuel depots.

Syrian President Bashar al-Assad has denounced the U.S. military presence in Syria.

"Any foreign troops coming to Syria without our invitation or consultation or permission, they are invaders, whether they are American, Turkish, or any other one," Mr. Assad said in an interview earlier this year. "They didn't succeed anywhere they sent troops, they only create a mess. They are very good in creating problems and destroying, but they are very bad in finding solutions."

Margaret Coker in Istanbul and Nour Alakraa in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com

Related

* U.S. to Supply Antitank Weapons to Kurdish Fighters in Syria (May 15)

* Trump Set to Arm Kurds in \b ISIS\b0  Fight, Angering Turkey (May 9)

* Borderlands: A Year on the Syrian-Turkish Border

Document WSJO000020170719ed7j0080x
