
World
U.S. Warns Syria Over Chemical Weapons; Pentagon prepares for possible strike if Assad launches attack

By Dion Nissenbaum and Thomas Grove 
997 words
28 June 2017
02:09
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military stepped up preparations on Tuesday for a possible strike against the Syrian regime after Washington said it picked up signs that President Bashar al-Assad was preparing to use chemical weapons again.

The White House set the stage for a new showdown with Mr. Assad and his allies with an unusual warning late Monday that the Syrian regime would pay a "heavy price" if it launches another chemical-weapons attack on its own people.

The statement came after the U.S. learned Syria had armed a warplane with chemical weapons that could be used at any time, U.S. officials said on Tuesday.

U.S. officials said they hoped the blunt public threat would deter Mr. Assad from using such weapons, but began devising military options if President Donald Trump decides to strike Syria again. In April, Mr. Trump ordered a cruise-missile strike on a Syrian airfield after a chemical attack widely blamed on the Assad regime killed more than 80 people in Syria's Idlib province.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson raised the issue in a call with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Monday as the U.S. pressed Moscow to constrain its Syrian ally, according to a U.S. official.

On Tuesday, Nikki Haley, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told a congressional hearing that the White House statement was meant to be a warning to Russia and Iran, Mr. Assad's two major allies in the six-year-old Syrian war.

"I believe that the goal is at this point not just to send Assad a message, but to send Russia and Iran a message that if this happens again we are putting you on notice," Ms. Haley said.

Russia and Iran responded to the White House warning with their own criticisms of American involvement in the Middle East.

Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said Moscow considers "such threats to a lawful government unacceptable," according to Russian news agencies.

On Twitter, Iran's Foreign Minister Javad Zarif suggested that the U.S. threats would detract from the fight against Islamic State, also known as ISIS. "Another dangerous U.S. escalation in Syria on fake pretext will only serve ISIS, precisely when it's being wiped out by Iraqi & Syrian people," he tweeted.

In Syria, Mr. Assad visited a Russian air base on Tuesday, where he was filmed climbing into the cockpit of a Russian warplane. A Syrian government official denied that the regime has chemical weapons.

The U.S. warnings come amid a recent rise in battlefield confrontations between the Syrian regime and American forces battling Islamic State in Syria, and the confrontations threaten to widen into a more serious clash with the regime.

Over the past six weeks, U.S. forces have shot down a Syrian regime warplane, and two Iranian-made drones viewed as threats to American forces and Syrian fighters they are working with in the country. The U.S. also has carried out airstrikes on Syrian government forces and their Iranian-backed allies in southern Syria, drawing the U.S. military's firepower away from its focus on Islamic State.

The new standoff was triggered by surveillance of the Shayrat airfield that the U.S. said was used in April to launch the earlier chemical weapons attack. The strike Mr. Trump ordered in April targeted that airfield.

Images of dead and dying children as a result of that April attack spurred outrage at the time, and Mr. Trump cited the images in saying the attack had changed his view of the conflict and Mr. Assad.

For the first time since the April strike, U.S. officials said Tuesday they had new intelligence showing the Syrian regime had moved a warplane into a shelter associated with chemical weapons at the Shayrat airfield.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. has seen "actions suggestive of intent to use chemical weapons." The U.S. has been tracking developments at Shayrat for several days and indications that Syria is preparing to use chemical weapons have become "more compelling" in the last 24 hours, he said Tuesday morning.

The U.S. cruise missile strike on Shayrat in April hit aircraft hangars, fuel depots, radar and ammunition bunkers. The U.S. said it destroyed about 20 planes in that attack, but the airfield was quickly back in operation.

The U.S. didn't target any suspected chemical weapons depots at the airfield in April because of fears that a strike could release the deadly weapons into the air. At the time, some outside analysts criticized the U.S. for not hitting the base harder.

Soon after the strike, Mr. Trump responded on Twitter to criticism that the U.S. didn't hit the runways more forcefully, writing, "The reason you don't generally hit runways is that they are easy and inexpensive to quickly fix (fill in and top)!"

Pentagon officials have said they have the ability to carry out a quick airstrike in the region if Mr. Trump orders another strike. But there were few indications on Tuesday that the U.S. was poised to launch a pre-emptive strike.

Mr. Trump is scheduled to travel next week to Europe to visit Poland and attend a meeting of the Group of 20 world powers in Hamburg, Germany, where he may also sit down separately with Russian President Vladimir Putin for the first time since taking office.

The Kremlin spokesman, Mr. Peskov, said Tuesday that a meeting on the sidelines of the Hamburg summit may take place but that full-fledged bilateral talks weren't yet planned, Interfax reported.

Felicia Schwartz, Maria Abi-Habib, Nour Alakraa and Asa Fitch contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170627ed6r002xl
