World News:  ISIS  Sinks Teeth Into Philippines --- Amid Mideast losses, militants expand focus; conflict in south is now jihadist 'cause celebre'

By James Hookway 
747 words
15 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The signs are mounting that the Philippines is now a primary target for Islamic State.

The southern reaches of the mostly Roman Catholic country have long been home to Muslim insurgents seeking to carve out an independent state. Until now, counterterrorism officials and experts have largely viewed local declarations of loyalty to Islamic State founder Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi as little more than pleas for attention. That is changing.

One of the newest insurgent groups shocked the country three weeks ago by marching into Marawi City and waving black Islamic State flags; it is still holding around 20% of the city along with hundreds of hostages. The standoff with the Philippine military so far has claimed the lives of at least 58 security forces, nearly 200 rebels and dozens of civilians.

Since the May 23 attack, Islamic State has taken a stronger interest in the Philippines, profiling some of the militants in its propaganda magazine Rumiyah and falsely claiming responsibility for the burning of a Manila casino that left 37 people dead; police say it was in fact a botched robbery.

On Sunday, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte said "it appears that al-Baghdadi himself, the leader of ISIS, has specifically ordered terrorist activities here in the Philippines." Mr. Duterte didn't say how he knew about Mr. Baghdadi's instructions.

Islamic State's spokesman, in an audio recording circulated on Tuesday, appeared to single out the Philippines for further attacks and praised the assault on Marawi.

The battle for Marawi is being waged by one of the region's most powerful militias, and it could determine whether Islamic State can lay down a marker in the Philippines.

Some intelligence officials worry that the Philippines' growing profile in jihadist circles could bring more foreign fighters to its shores as Islamic State loses ground in Syria and Iraq.

Governments across Southeast Asia and Australia already are watching the Philippines with concern as militants from Indonesia, Malaysia, Yemen and Saudi Arabia join the fight. U.S. Special Operations Forces are providing support for the Philippine military in Marawi.

The danger, said an intelligence official in the Philippines, is that "the southern Philippines is becoming a cause celebre again."

The potential for recruiting the Philippines' Muslim minority, whose lands were gradually taken over by waves of settlers under Spanish then American colonizers, has long drawn the interest of foreign jihadists. Osama bin Laden was in regular contact with the late Muslim separatist leader Hashim Salamat.

The Philippines' porous borders and lax immigration control also make it an attractive destination for foreign extremists, according to Sidney Jones, a terrorism expert at the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict in Jakarta. Fighters are also attracted, in part, because some of the combatants have extensive networks, Ms. Jones said.

"They're really quite sophisticated and have a lot of resources to draw on, and that's attractive," she said.

Islamic State's emir in the Philippines is Isnilon Hapilon, a 51-year-old commander with the Abu Sayyaf terrorist group, which was seeded in the 1990s with help from al Qaeda. He swore loyalty to Islamic State in 2014, and since then has built an alliance with the Maute family, an aristocratic landowning clan who command hundreds of followers.

Ms. Jones said the Mautes are likely the brains behind the Marawi operation, particularly 37-year-old Omarkhayam Maute.

Omar, as he is known, studied Islam in Egypt and later married the daughter of an influential conservative cleric in Indonesia. He returned to the southern Philippines, where he and his brother Abdullah Maute took the reins of the family's local militia. In 2015, the brothers publicly aligned it with Islamic State.

Their ultimate goal, senior Philippine officials said, was to take control of Marawi, the Philippines' largest Muslim-majority city.

Armed forces chief Gen. Eduardo Ano said the military caught a break when soldiers inadvertently interrupted the planning for the operation by raiding a safe house in Marawi where they believed Mr. Hapilon was holed up. That forced the Maute group to take up arms prematurely.

"They were not able to fully deploy all their forces," Gen. Ano told reporters.

Military officials said they are trying to determine whether the Maute brothers are among several guerrillas killed in a battle on Saturday.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170615ed6f0001b
