Markets
Pullback on Wall Street Rules | Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers | Fiduciary Rule Casualty | Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances; The Wall Street Journal's financial regulation newsletter for Monday, August 14, 2017.

2,197 words
14 August 2017
12:45
WSJ Pro Financial Regulation
RSTPROFR
English
Copyright ©017, Dow Jones & Company, Inc. 

Ackerman's Take: Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

Dilemma Over Fannie, Freddie Finances

Federal Housing Finance Agency chief Mel Watt has warned for months that he might order Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to build up cash buffers to insulate themselves against future losses. He recently indicated he's still looking for political cover to follow through with his plan.

Mr. Watt is facing a "damned if you do, damned if you don't" situation that has no easy answers.

At issue are the mortgage-finance giants' ultra-thin capital levels, which will drop to zero in January under the terms of their federal bailouts. As a result, should the companies suffer an operating loss, they would have no capital to absorb it and would be forced to draw on their $258 billion government backstop. That would be interpreted as yet another bailout for the companies and, according to Mr. Watt, could trigger "adverse" market consequences.

To avoid that scenario, Mr. Watt has said he might order the companies to retain earnings rather than to continue sending them to the Treasury Department (as they currently do under the terms of their bailouts). But so far he's received no political support from the Trump administration or key congressional Republicans to make such a change.

(Meanwhile, the companies signaled earlier this month that they might not make their quarterly dividend payment to Treasury at the end of September— move that could divert about $5 billion from federal coffers just as the government's debt ceiling needs to be raised.)

Mr. Watt seems now to acknowledge he's stuck: He wants to order the companies to begin to build up their capital buffers, but there are significant political pitfalls for doing do.

"I have publicly expressed my concerns that the declining capital buffers leave the enterprises with little or no ability to absorb losses," he wrote the National Association of Realtors last week. "However, I am sensitive to the prospect that whatever steps FHFA could take might be misperceived as either an effort to promote recapitalization and release of the enterprises [from government control] or as interference with Congress's important work to advance housing finance reform."

To be sure, Mr. Watt didn't rule out eventually requiring the companies to retain their profits, but his letter suggests he is eager to see some political momentum to back such a move, saying he will "continue to look for ways to ensure that the concerns I have expressed are addressed constructively."

Mr. Watt is an Obama-administration appointee whose term expires in January 2019.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Watt declined to comment on the letter, which came in response to a Realtor-backed plan to allow the mortgage-finance firms to begin retaining some of their profits while Congress deliberates on how to refashion them. The National Association of Realtors says allowing the companies to retain some of their earnings would create a buffer between any losses and taxpayers, who would be on the hook should the companies need to draw on their Treasury backstop.

William Brown, the group's president, said in a written statement that his members "appreciate" Mr. Watt's attention to the issue.

Key Developments in Washington, on Wall Street, and Beyond

Trump Chips Away at Postcrisis Wall Street Rules

Efforts toward financial deregulation are beginning to take concrete shape on rules governing trading desks, bank boardrooms, corporations' financial disclosures and more. Nearly seven months into the Trump administration, regulators are setting the stage for a wave of eased rules.

Several agencies are reviewing the Volcker rule, a part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act that limits banks' trading. Some regulators also recently dropped a plan to restrict bonuses on Wall Street that had been opposed by banks and brokerage firms. And the Labor Department on Wednesday disclosed an 18-month delay in the so-called fiduciary rule that requires brokers to act in clients' best interests when they handle retirement accounts.

The moves show that while President Donald Trump is struggling to advance his legislative agenda in Congress, his administration has begun laying the groundwork to change some of the myriad rules that Wall Street has sought for years to overturn or water down.

Investors Take On Mortgage Risk From Taxpayers

Investors are snapping up a new type of security sold by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, increasingly assuming the risks of mortgage defaults from taxpayers and powering a quiet transformation of the housing giants after almost a decade of government control.

Fannie and Freddie have sold roughly $48 billion of the securities since 2013 to a broadening group of buyers including asset managers and insurance companies. Sales are expected to reach a fresh high of $15 billion this year, up from the previous record $13 billion last year, according to J.P. Morgan Securities.

The sales mark an early step toward reducing the government's role in the $14.4 trillion U.S. mortgage market. The amount of mortgage debt funneled through Fannie and Freddie and other taxpayer-backed entities roughly doubled after the financial crisis, to around 70%. The progress has come despite a long-running stalemate in Congress, which has stumbled in its effort to design a replacement for the decades-old housing-finance system that centers on Fannie and Freddie.

Fiduciary Rule Casualty: Brokers' Mutual-Fund Offerings

Is less more when it comes to investor choice? That's the question facing brokerage firms and investment advisers as they look to comply with a landmark retirement-savings rule.

Large brokerage firms typically offer thousands of mutual funds to clients. But compliance demands of the fiduciary rule, which began to take effect in June and requires stewards of tax-advantaged retirement savings to act in clients' best interests rather than their own, are causing some firms to review their offerings.

Conducting the due diligence and documentation required on so many investments can be onerous, and under the rule, some firms may face increased litigation risks. As a result, brokerages may remove some funds—ncluding those with higher fees or those that present perceived risks—rom their sales platforms.

Search Is On for Top Audit Regulator

One of the highest-paying jobs in regulating Wall Street is about to be open—nd the boss is taking applications.

U.S. officials are looking to hire a new chairman of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, a little-known body that oversees the country's largest accounting firms and their audits of public companies and broker-dealers, according to a statement issued Friday. The role, created by the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley law, pays more than $670,000 a year.

China's State Firms Make Room for the Communist Party on Their Boards

A push to establish the Communist Party in Chinese state enterprises is rolling through Hong Kong, raising corporate-governance concerns in one of the year's best-performing stock markets.

Since 2016, at least 32 Chinese state-owned companies or units listed in Hong Kong have proposed changes to their corporate structures to install Communist Party committees that advise their boards of directors. The moves, most coming in recent months, are prompting questions from market participants about who holds power at these companies, and whether they will be run for the benefit of investors.

Ex-Trader Seeks Redemption for ‘ntellectual Grift'

Chris Arnade, a former bond trader, walked away from Wall Street after 20 years to photograph and write about America's disaffected poor. His work, especially on how economic inequality contributed to Donald Trump's political ascent, has garnered a large following of fans—nd detractors—cross the political spectrum.

Mr. Arnade's unusual bipartisan appeal—oth Arkansas Republican Sen. Tom Cotton and billionaire Democratic fundraiser Chris Sacca invited him to lunch this spring—eflects the contradictions of a life spent straddling social and economic divides.

WSJ Pro: Market Talk: Daily Analysis Roundup

Read our compilation of concise, timely analysis by Wall Street Journal reporters. Kashkari: Wells Fargo Needs to Hold People Accountable; Annual Executive Pay Votes Get Investor Backing; Cost Cuts Still Crucial for Clientis's Credit; Chinese Lenders Seen Delivering Consensus Beating 1H; Last Excuse for Thin Spreads on U.S. Junk Bonds Gone

FEATURED GRAPHIC

Six Financial-Regulation Issues and Where They Stand

The Trump administration and the Republican-led Congress have argued for rolling back postcrisis financial regulations, a move they say would help spur economic growth. So far, many rules remain in place, but officials are beginning the work of undoing them. Here's a look at the state of play on six big issues in financial regulation nearly seven months into the Trump administration.

Bitcoin Soars Past $4,000 in Weekend Trading

The price of the digital currency bitcoin crossed over the $4,000 mark for the first time in its nine-year history, despite a widespread selloff in other major digital currencies.

Bitcoin was trading Sunday morning near $4,033, according to the news and research site CoinDesk, up 3.1% on the day, and up more than 25% in August. The price, which rose as high as $4,200 Sunday morning, has more than quadrupled so far this year.

Unlike stocks and other traditional assets that trade on exchanges with set hours, bitcoin trades electronically 24-hours a day and during weekends. The gains Saturday and Sunday seemed to be coming at the expense of other digital currencies, many of which have been issued just this year in a developing trend called "initial coin offerings."

Latest Hot Digital Coin Offering: $187 Million in One Hour for Filecoin

Delaying Fiduciary Rule Costs Savers Billions

The Labor Department's proposed 18-month delay of the compliance date for the fiduciary rule "would be enormously expensive to retirement savers," according to an analysis by the Economic Policy Institute. The left-leaning Washington think tank estimates the delay will cost retirement savers $10.9 billion over the next 30 years. "We look over a 30 year horizon because if there is a delay, losses to retirement investors persist and compound long after the delay ends," the institute writes.

A Link Between Gambling and Financial Misreporting

Companies based in areas where residents hold gambling-friendly attitudes are more likely to intentionally misreport financial information, researchers found. Intentional financial-misreporting rates were 50% higher in areas where gambling is more accepted by the majority of residents, according to Dane Christensen, a University of Oregon professor and one of three co-authors of the research which has been accepted for publication in the journal Contemporary Accounting Research. "We wanted to know what attitudes are involved when people decide to misreport financial data," Dr. Christensen says. "One of the attitudes involved is an acceptance to take gambles."

Fed Honed, Didn't Lower, Requirements for Bank Boards

The Federal Reserve's revised requirements for banks' boards of directors don't lower supervisory standards but aim expectations "more squarely toward senior management," William Lang writes for American Banker. Though the proposal has been viewed as a narrowing of the central bank's criteria for boards, it still requires "some substantial legwork" from banks to address weaknesses in oversight, says Mr. Lang, a former head of supervision at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. "They face significant regulatory risk if they only concentrate on the narrowing of Fed demands for boards and fail to properly address the new expectations," he writes.

U.S. investigators uncovered a global financial network run by a senior Islamic State official that funneled money to an alleged \b ISIS\b0  operative in the U.S. through fake eBay transactions, according to a recently unsealed FBI affidavit.

Credit Suisse Group AG will prohibit trading of certain Venezuelan bonds, citing the country's political climate, according to an internal bank memo.

A former employee of online lender Social Finance Inc. accused the company in a lawsuit of wrongfully terminating him after he reported some managers had concealed errors made in processing loan applications and that another had harassed female employees by making sexual or inappropriate comments.

Stericycle, a Lake Forest, Ill.-based firm that handles medical waste, said it received an SEC subpoena relating to its compliance with U.S. foreign-bribery law regarding its operations in Latin America.

Canadian alternative lender Callidus Capital, accused by whistleblowers of fraud, swung to a second-quarter loss.

Send us your tips, suggestions and feedback. Write to:

Andrew Ackerman, Mark H. Anderson, Katy Burne, Sarah Chacko, Chao Deng, Danny Dougherty, Yuka Hayashi, Dave Michaels, Gabriel T. Rubin, Ryan Tracy, Julia-Ambra Verlaine, Aruna Viswanatha, Rachel Witkowski, Jana Zabkova.

Follow us on Twitter:

@amacker, @AndersonMH, @KatyBurne, @sarahheartsnews, @chao_deng, @DannyDougherty, @TokyoWoods, @DavidAMichaels, @Rubinations, @ryanjtracy, @JAVerlaine, @aviswanatha, @RachelWitkowski, @zabkova

Document RSTPROFR20170814ed8e00001
