The Learning Network; Lesson Plans
10 Ways to Teach With The New York Times Today

By KATHERINE SCHULTEN and MICHAEL GONCHAR 
3,777 words
28 April 2017
17:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated: August, 2017

Last spring, inspired by the many schools who had just received subscriptions to NYTimes.com through our new Sponsorship program, we dedicated our first-ever Learning Network webinar to showcasing 10 ways most teachers could weave any day’ Times into their curriculum.

You can register and watch that webinar here, but we have also written up pretty much everything important we said in the post below.

Have a look, and let us know if you have questions or ideas. And whether you’e new to using the paper in your classroom or have been teaching with The Times for years, thank you!

_________

1. Introduce news literacy with a quick game.

Maybe you’e just gotten a class subscription to NYTimes.com, or maybe, at a time when everyone’ talking about “ake news,”ou would like your students to understand what makes a trusted, 165-year-old news source different from invented information created by jobless young people in need of cash.

We have a quick game that can help — scavenger hunt that should take just one class period for most students.

The 26 questions are designed to get students clicking around NYTimes.com, learning how to navigate the site, locating news that’ important to them —rom the local weather to sports scores —nd understanding things like how to use Times search, what a byline is, and how the Opinion section is different from the news section.

It also invites them to think about the role of a newspaper in a democracy, by posing one simple challenge:

Write the headline of an article that would not be printed if the U.S. government controlled the press.

For instance, try that with the headlines from the April 1, 2017, front page:

The hunt ends by asking them to choose one article that especially interested them and read it closely —omething we consider perhaps the most important first step you can take in getting your students to build a news-reading habit. Allowing students free choice and letting them “ander”hrough the paper shows them how much there is beyond big front-page headline news —nd, with almost 20 years of hearing from students on this site, we promise you that you’l be surprised by the interesting breadth of choices they make.

You can take the learning even further with this related lesson plan. (And if you’e using the paper in print, we have a couple of games for that too —oth a separate scavenger hunt and Front Page Bingo.)

_________

2. Teach writing with argumentative, informational and narrative mentor texts and prompts.

One of the top reasons teachers and students visit The Learning Network is to use our daily writing prompts. Like all our student features, they and the Times articles they link to are completely free.

Every school day since 2009 we have asked a Student Opinion question. That’ more than a thousand questions so far.

To find them, use the writing prompt icon on the Learning Network home page. There you will see we offer two types of daily prompts.

Our Student Opinion questions include an excerpt from a Times article, as well as sub-questions to promote deeper thinking.

Our Picture Prompts include just a few lines of text and invite student writing inspired by an image —lthough they, too, link to a related Times article. Teachers tell us Picture Prompts work particularly well for E.L.L. students and middle school students, though, of course, they can be used with many kinds of learners.

Over the years we’e collected our most popular Student Opinion questions into two different lists: one that features  401 argumentative writing prompts and another that contains 650 narrative and personal writing prompts. Both of these lists are organized by categories, such as “ocial media”r “ideo games,”nd all of the questions link back to the original post.

In addition to our prompts, we also offer rich lesson plans on many writing topics like these two illustrated here, using New York Times features like “odern Love”nd “ives”o teach personal writing and how to teach more effective counterarguments.

_________

3. Give students an authentic audience for their work.

Updated: Here is our 2017-18 contest calendar.

We know how important it is to give students an authentic audience beyond the classroom for their writing and opinions. One feature of The Learning Network we’e very proud of is the way it allows students from around the world a public voice.

All our writing prompts are open to student comment, and tens of thousands of teenagers have posted their thoughts over the years. Students can also read what others have to say and reply to them.

And, unlike most other online public forums, our comments are all human-moderated. While we’e quite forgiving of spelling, grammar or vocabulary errors —fter all, for many in our audience, English is not a first language —e do not approve rude or disrespectful remarks. Our goal is to promote civil dialogue, no matter what the issue.

In addition to our daily writing prompts, we also offer student contests throughout the entire year.

This school year’ contests include our Editorial Cartoon Contest, along with many more, including three new ones. Take a look, and plan ahead.

Each student entry is read or judged by an editor of the Learning Network, a New York Times staff member, a teacher-partner of ours, or an expert in the field. We publish the winning submissions of each contest on The New York Times Learning Network, and we also celebrate the work of runners-up and honorable mentions too.

_________

4. Keep up with current events.

Our site helps you do this every day, and many teachers know that if important breaking news happens, we’l always create a student writing prompt, lesson plan or other feature to give you a quick way to weave it into your curriculum.

But if you want some quick suggestions that can work with any day’ paper, here is our 50 Ways to Teach With Current Events that contains both our own ideas and ideas from teachers all over.

The Times itself has also made keeping abreast of the news easier than ever:

•very weekday morning and evening, and once each weekend, you can find a “riefing”n the home page that summarizes the top stories in just a couple of sentences. You and your students can also get that briefing by email if you like.

•he Times is now on Snapchat Discover, with new visual narratives every 24 hours.

•ou can also listen to a new 15-minute daily podcast that explores the top news and puts it into context.

For our part, once a week on The Learning Network we write a 10-question news quiz just for students. Each question provides a bit of context and links to the original story, as well as scores how many got each question right. We always save our 10th question for news literacy: Students have to choose which of four articles is not from The Times, but, instead, from the satirical site The Onion:

We also choose an Article of the Day every weekday, on important stories students need to understand —nd on topics we think will interest them. For each, we pose comprehension questions to help them read the article, as well as a Warm-Up and Going Further that they can do on their own, or that teachers can turn into a lesson plan. A typical week might look like the one in early April in which we chose stories on Syria, the Supreme Court, Space X, video gaming and an arts program in a U.S. prison.

_________

5. Connect what you’e teaching to the world today.

[Video: JMU DNA Dance on the Quad Watch on YouTube.]

Back in 2011, professors at James Madison Univer s i ty were so inspired by a Times series on DNA that they made it the required reading for the incoming freshman class —hen got those students to create the dance you see above, a “hysical representation”f what they learned. One of those professors wrote it up  for us  .

We love to hear about how people are teaching and learning with The Times. Our Reader Ideas column features scores of ideas, sent in by teachers, librarians, coaches, parents and peer-educating teenagers, all showing you how easy it can be to connect what you’e already teaching to current events or other Times features.

Whether you have a relatively simple idea like using restaurant reviews with E.L.L. students or an elaborate project done by the entire incoming class at your university, we’ love to hear from you.

Here’ how Joni-Jean Crivello , a middle school social studies teacher in New Jersey, uses the paper:

I use The New York Times almost daily as a teaching tool with my eighth-grade American history students. Connections exist consistently, whether we are analyzing American indigenous people, colonization or occupation in places like Zimbabwe, events leading to revolution, the idea of democracy, the assimilation of immigrants into American culture, the role of African-Americans and women in society, civil unrest or civil war.

Middle schoolers appreciate being treated like adults by the simple act of sharing The New York Times and the multitude of discussions that always ensue.

If you teach with The Times, just tell us about it here.

_________

6. Make often-taught themes and topics relevant.

How is the history or literature you’e teaching still relevant today?

What recent research reporting in the Science Times might update your biology textbook?

How are questions you pose in your civics class playing out on the front page?

Via The Times, your students can see the concepts, questions and theories they wrestle with in class in action in the “eal world.”

We offer weekly lesson plans that attempt to simplify things for you by collecting articles, essays, videos, photographs and infographics on often-taught subjects.

English teachers : We have a big, and growing collection that matches literature to the nonfiction found in The Times.

In some of these lesson plans, we choose just one piece that works well, as in this “ext to text”esson plan that pairs an article about delayed adulthood with “he Catcher in the Rye.”

Other lesson plans provide several ideas for teaching an author or work, each with many links to Times features that can help, as in Seven Ways to Teach Shakespeare, which includes everything from videos from the Theater section to an article about a Baghdad production of “omeo and Juliet”eaturing Shiites and Sunnis.

Here is our complete collection as of now, but it’ always growing:

Maya Angelou, “he Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian,”“ntigone,”“he Book Thief,”“he Catcher in the Rye,”“he Crucible,”“eath of a Salesman,”Roald Dahl, Charles Dickens, “nrique’ Journey,”“rankenstein,”“he Giver,”“he Glass Castle,”“he Grapes of Wrath,”“he Great Gatsby,”“arry Potter,”“The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks,”“he Hunger Games,”“he Kite Runner,”“ord of the Flies,”“f Mice and Men,”John Milton,“he Necklace,””Orwell and “984”, “he Outsiders,”“ Raisin in the Sun,”Shakespeare, Mark Twain and “uckleberry Finn,”“he Scarlet Letter,”“peak,” and “o Kill a Mockingbird.”

Social studies teachers: When there’ important news we know teachers want to bring it into the classroom right away —uch as the president’ immigration ban or the rising concern over fake news —e publish a lesson plan to help you.

But we’e also mindful of topics that we know are already embedded in your curriculum, and we want to help you connect those to current events easily. For instance, in one lesson this year we paired Colin Kaepernick’ national anthem protest with a speech by Frederick Douglass. In another, we tied the Syrian refugee crisis with Jewish refugees in the 1930s.

STEM teachers: Our STEM lessons take the latest research that appears in the Science Times, such as genetically engineered organisms and Crispr technology, or statistics and the Electoral College, and provide ways to help students go deeper and make connections. We also have a whole column of STEM-focused Articles of the Day.

But if you’e just looking for inspiration, the Science section front is the place to start. For instance, if you don’ know about the very short (one to three minute) “cience Take”ideos, we hope you’l find them uniquely easy to weave in.

And if you’e looking for a lesson plan or teaching resource on any topic —hether climate change, infectious diseases, or checks and balances in government —ust scroll down on the Learning Network home page or our Lesson Plan page to find our search bar. Type in what you’e looking for, and see what comes up.

You can also do a search from the NYTimes.com home page for anything you’e teaching, which will surface articles with those keywords published in The New York Times since 1851. Sometimes, as in the cases of topics like the Civil War or the theory of evolution, the topic is so big and so much has been written about it that there will be a whole Times Topics page that collects all the most relevant Times articles published on the subject.

_________

7. Teach with visuals.

If you picked up a copy of an 1851 New-York Daily Times, you’ be hard pressed to find any visual images, but that’ not at all true today.

NYTimes.com is full of photographs, videos, illustrations, charts, graphs, infographics and maps that present an opportunity for students to look closely, practice their visual thinking and analysis skills, and engage with the news and the world.

One way to find intriguing Times images and videos is by clicking on our Multimedia icon.

There you’l find perhaps our most popular weekly feature, What’ Going On in This Picture? Every Monday we ask students to look closely at an image stripped of its caption and closely observe what they see. Typically we have several hundred students participating in a live-moderated discussion each week. We hear from English teachers, E.L.L. teachers, elementary school teachers and even science teachers about how much they love this feature —nd how easily it can be used to encourage students to support claims with evidence.

We also have a Friday Film Club, where we feature a short Times film, usually under 10 minutes long, on a range of interesting subjects, such as low-rider fans and their tricked-out cars in Odessa, Texas.

In addition, we offer a bank of lesson plans and teaching resources on how to use Times visuals, such as our collection of 25 mini-films on race, bias and identity; and our lesson plan on teaching with ScienceTake videos; our lesson plan “Baseball, Happiness and Immigration,”hich highlights various U.S. maps such as the “ap of Baseball Nation” and our math lesson on using infographics, including a graph illustrating from where N.B.A. players are most likely to hit their shots.

And if you’e not familiar with The Upshot, check it out —t’ a Times section dedicated to telling important stories with analysis and graphics.

_________

8. Enliven history with primary sources from our archives.

Newspapers like the Times have been called the “ough draft of history,”nd if you flip through the tool we call TimesMachine, you can see why.

TimesMachine allows you to page through every single edition of The New York Times from 1851-2002, exactly as it was originally published.

So you can see how “en Walk on Moon”as originally reported, but you can also see the moon-themed advertisements that accompanied the reporting that day, as well as what was happening back on earth, from the movies that were playing to what the fashions looked like to who was winning in baseball.

We also have many lesson plans and collections that link to archival reporting we’e found for you, such as our recent Vietnam War lesson, or these about the transcontinental railroad, Black history, World War I, the civil rights movement and many more. In most of these collections, we link not only to archival articles, but also to collections of photographs, relevant videos, essays, first-person accounts, infographics and more.

But keep in mind that The Times now and The Times then is not only front-page news about wars and disasters. You can also find cats mailing themselves to Santa and the history of the prom and the first mention of pizza. We hope both you and your students will have fun looking around.

_________

9. Develop vocabulary and other literacy skills across the curriculum.

The photo above is a screenshot of the home page one day this month, and, as you can see, at least nine of what we used to call “AT words”re waiting there for your students. But we guarantee that if you go to the home page at any time, including right now, there will be at least that many, if not more —ll offering a way to understand words in context.

On our site, we have a couple of features that can help deepen vocabulary-learning. Our Word of the Day feature tells you how often a word was in the Times in the last year, includes an interesting paragraph for context, and ends with a little quiz that tests student understanding.

We also have an annual contest that invites students to make 15-second videos to show their understanding of the word of their choice ... like this recent winner who defined “octurnal.”ou can find many more ideas in our 12 Ways to Learn Vocabulary With The New York Times.

[Video: Nocturnal Watch on YouTube.]

And we have heard from both teachers and parents that the Daily Mini crossword —hich can take just seconds or minutes to complete depending on the day —s very popular with teenagers, and a fun way to learn vocabulary.

We also have lesson plans on a number of other literacy skills that you can use across the curriculum, and we reinforce those skills regularly in all of our features. Here are just a few:

Making inferences

Close-reading

Summarizing

Annotating

Determining the reliability of sources

Sorting fact from opinion

Listening and note-taking

Revising writing

_________

10. Encourage independent readers and empowered citizens.

The best way to get teenagers to start reading The Times or any other newspaper regularly? Just give them time to browse the articles, features, photos, videos, podcasts, games and graphics and find what they like.

We know from nearly 20 years of hearing from students on this site that you’l be surprised and delighted by the range of stories they choose —nd what they say about why they chose them.

This home-schooled girl wrote to our Reader Ideas column last year and explained how she “anders”hrough The Times daily, and finds everything from recipes she wants to make to physics articles from the Science Times to talk about with her brother.

Since 2010, our Summer Reading Contest has tried to encourage this “andering”y posing two simple questions each Friday: “hat interested you most in The Times this week? Why?”his year the contest runs from June 16-Aug. 25, and we’ love to have your students join us.

Everything you need to know to participate is here, but we’l also have a webinar that goes beyond the contest to talk about making The Times an integral part of an independent-reading program in your classroom.

_________

Finally, if you watched our webinar, you know we had help from the Times political and investigative reporter Nicholas Confessore.

He spoke about how a Times story is reported, written, fact-checked and published, and he focused that explanation on this Feb. 18, 2017, article, “Trump’ ‘inter White House’ A Peek at the Exclusive Members’ist at Mar-a-Lago.”

You might ask your students to read the piece carefully and think about what a journalist might need to do to obtain and verify information like The Times reported —hen invite them to watch the last part of the webinar (beginning at 39:11) to hear about how he and the rest of his team did it.

You might also like to ask them to respond to the question a webinar participant asked (beginning at 53:40), “hat do you see as the biggest problem for a new generation of citizens, our students, now that there is less clarity between real and fake news?”

Printable Scavenger Hunt | Our list of writing prompts includes: Does technology make us more alone? And, Is social media making us more narcissistic? Find them here. | Jake Michaels for The New York Times | Contest Calendar | One of the student winners from our 2016 Editorial Cartoon Contest. Click here to see all of them. | Margaret Lu | An Iraq map showing areas under ISIS control; a rally outside the Supreme Court in October 2013 protesting the role of money in politics; demonstrators in Washington in August 2014 protesting the killing of Michael Brown. Related Lesson Plan | The New York Times, left; Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images; and Jose Luis Magana/Associated Press | Related Interactive | Related Lesson Plan | Football players at Aurora Central High School in Colorado went down on one knee in a sign of protest on Oct. 1 while the national anthem was played before a game. Related Article | Related Lesson Plan | Nick Cote for The New York Times | Our What’ Going On in This Picture? Feature | A Map of Baseball Nation | Related Lesson Plan | Tom Giratikanon, Josh Katz, David Leonhardt and Kevin Quealy | April 16, 1912, as seen in TimesMachine. | Kathryn Rosnau, a member of this year’ Student Council, reads The Times as a regular part of her home-schooling, and wrote about it for the blog. | Kathryn Rosnau | Mar-a-Lago, the members-only club in Palm Beach, Fla., is being called the winter White House. The entry fee for members was doubled, to $200,000, shortly after President Trump took office. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | The New York Times prints between 300,000 to 800,000 newspapers daily at its main facility in Queens. Take a 360°our as the paper comes together. | By CHANG W. LEE, NIKO KOPPEL and SAMANTHA QUICK 

Document NYTFEED020170428ed4s005ha
