
World News: Stalled Convoy Baits Trap for Islamic State

By Margherita Stancati 
418 words
5 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State said a convoy of militants stranded in Syria has proved an unexpected boon, drawing other fighters from the extremist group seeking to reach the buses into the open and turning them into easy targets.

The buses, which were supposed to transport hundreds of Islamic State fighters and their families to a town in eastern Syria near the Iraqi border from the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria, have been stuck for nearly a week after U.S. airstrikes blocked them from reaching their destination. They were being evacuated under a controversial deal brokered by the Iran-backed Lebanese militant group Hezbollah that the U.S. opposed.

"It has been quite lucrative for the coalition because of all the assets that ISIS has put toward it," said the coalition spokesman, U.S. Army Col. Ryan Dillon. "They have exposed themselves as part of this event, and we were able to capitalize on it," he said. "It presented an opportunity for the coalition to strike and remove several ISIS fighters and resources from the battlefield."

The buses were en route to Deir Ezzour province in eastern Syria, one of last remaining strongholds of Islamic State.

U.S. airstrikes cratered a road and destroyed a bridge to prevent the convoy from advancing and have repeatedly targeted Islamic State fighters trying to reach the buses. Col. Dillon said so far, some 85 militants and more than 40 vehicles have been hit by airstrikes. The strikes also targeted artillery systems, pickup trucks mounted with weapons and a tank.

Over the weekend, the convoy split up, with six of the 17 buses that originally left the Lebanese border turning back into Syrian-government controlled territory outside Deir Ezzour province. They stopped near the Syrian village of al-Sukhnah, said the coalition, which continues to monitor the 11 stranded buses. The coalition has refused to strike the buses directly because there are women and children on board. About 300 Islamic State fighters and 300 of their relatives evacuated Syria's mountainous border area with Lebanon after the Lebanese army and Syrian government forces backed by Hezbollah launched simultaneous but separate offensives against the group from both sides of the border.

"We know where they are right now. ISIS wants to continue to put fighters and resources to rescue them, and we will continue striking them," Col. Dillon said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170905ed9500011
