World
Philippines Says Foreign Fighters Have Joined Militant Group; Official characterizes conflict as an invasion, bolstering supporters of Duterte, martial law

By Jake Maxwell Watts 
856 words
26 May 2017
08:20
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA—oreign fighters have joined an Islamic State-linked militant group occupying a southern Philippine city and are seeking to turn the island of Mindanao into a caliphate, a government official said, calling the development an invasion.

While foreign fighters have long been suspected of joining militant groups in lawless parts of Mindanao, the government's announcement escalates a fragile situation in a region where troops are engaged in heavy fighting with militants.

Philippine Solicitor General Jose Calida's characterization of the conflict bolsters supporters of President Rodrigo Duterte, who on Tuesday declared martial law for the entirety of Mindanao—ome to 22 million people—ut his comments will likely to be met with skepticism by opponents who say the government's decision was draconian.

"What's happening in Mindanao is no longer a rebellion of Filipino citizens. It has transmogrified into invasion by foreign terrorists who heeded the clarion call of ISIS to go to the Philippines if they feel difficulty in going to Iraq or Syria," said Mr. Calida. He was referring to the terrorist group by its acronym, Islamic State of Iraq and Syria, and said that the foreigners involved were from Malaysia and Indonesia.

It is the president's constitutional duty to "unsheathe the republic's sword of martial law to crush the rebellion," he said, calling on Filipinos to trust in the wisdom of Mr. Duterte.

Government troops have pounded the city of Marawi on Mindanao with airstrikes and mortar fire as the battle drags on for a fourth day. At least 44 people have died in the fighting, including 31 militants.

Troops are trying try to free hostages and rid the town of dozens of fighters from the Maute group, a heavily armed militancy that occupied the city on Tuesday and burned several buildings, thwarting an attempt by authorities to arrest a notorious faction leader.

Mr. Duterte said he needed martial law to restore order to Mindanao and prevent Maute fighters from escaping. Its imposition, however, has worried rights activists and opponents of the president, who say martial law unnecessarily undermines liberties and threatens to derail fragile peace negotiations with several other groups in the restive area.

For decades, the Philippines government has fought several insurgencies in the jungles and poorer regions of Mindanao, where disparate groups and complex alliances are divided along racial, ideological and religious lines. Many of these groups, though separate from the Islamic State-linked Maute group, are heavily armed and have turned to violence and terrorism in the past to achieve their goals.

In recent years the government has sought peace with some of the older and larger groups, such as the communist New People's Army and the Muslim separatist Moro Islamic Liberation Front, an effort that has been mostly continued by Mr. Duterte's administration.

But that process has been threatened, some critics say, by the imposition of martial law.

Renato Reyes, an activist who represents an alliance of left-wing and communist groups in the Philippines, said martial law is a concern because "the martial powers of the president are quite broad" and the human-rights record of law enforcement is very poor.

The communist National Democratic Front of the Philippines publicly denounced martial law on Wednesday and called upon the New People's Army to accelerate recruitment.

The Moro Islamic Liberation Front didn't explicitly oppose martial law, but called on the government to protect the peace so no other groups use its nonimplementation to justify pursuit of violence.

In an attempt to allay concerns, armed forces spokesman Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla said Friday martial law "does not target peace-inclined groups" and asked for trust and vigilance from the public.

While the Philippines military has played down the impact of martial law on other groups, Mr. Duterte said on Wednesday he would be "harsh" and compared his own declaration of martial law to that of former dictator Ferdinand Marcos, whose regime used torture and murder to sustain his rule of more than two decades.

Mr. Duterte also threatened to expand his declaration to the entire country if he felt like it.

"For the longest time we have had very weak public institutions—ncluding security institutions—o that plays right into the heart of the question of safeguards and the question of effectiveness," said Edmund Tayao, a political analyst and expert in democracy and governance at the Local Government Development Foundation in the Philippines.

The Philippine constitution grants the president power to declare martial law for up to 60 days, thereby allowing warrantless arrests. The country's joint houses of Congress must approve the declaration, which they are expected to do on Monday. Any citizen of the Philippines has the right to challenge the declaration in the Supreme Court.

While there are many safeguards that protect against abuse of martial law, said Mr. Tayao, "there is really nothing that says we should not be vigilant."

Write to Jake Maxwell Watts at jake.watts@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170526ed5q000rt
