CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
'24' Reboot Has a Dire Ring to It

By JAMES PONIEWOZIK 
1,075 words
6 February 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Fox's ''24: Legacy'' probably never intended to be taken too seriously. The post-Super Bowl pilot was an hour of television, after all, that included the franchise's new hero, Eric Carter (Corey Hawkins), shooting down a construction pipe and using it as a deadly rolling pin.

But this reboot had seriousness thrust upon it. Running a week after Donald J. Trump's stringent immigration restrictions on seven predominantly Muslim countries, it could have been scripted straight from the president's direst imaginings. It was, intentionally or not, a one-hour Super Bowl ad for Islamophobia.

We open on an American home defiled -- family pictures, a Purple Heart, blood spatter on the walls. A jihadist kill team has slipped into the United States, slaughtering men, women and children, looking for a database of sleeper cells waiting to be activated.

That kind of supercompetent Islamic terror group is a staple in series like ''24.'' Not so much in real life, where after 9/11, Islamic terrorists in America have tended to be radicalized individuals or duos.

But demagoguery is an act of imagination. You ask people to imagine a mushroom cloud over an American city, as Dick Cheney did in building the case for the war in Iraq. Or that Muslim refugees from the seven countries on the ban list are an existential threat, though none have carried out fatal terror attacks in the United States.

And series like ''24: Legacy'' have, for years, provided that kind of raw nightmare material. The terrorists could be anywhere. They could be in your neighborhood. Or they could be in the schools, like Amira (Kathryn Prescott), the Chechen immigrant apparently planning an attack with her brother and a teacher she has under her Lolita-like spell. (Though her religion is not specifically mentioned, the subplot has overtones of the Tsarnaev brothers, who carried out the 2013 Boston Marathon bombings.)

In the tradition of ''24'' teen subplots, the story is straight-up ridiculous, but the implication is insidious, especially amid the current demonizing of immigrants and refugees: You let them in, and this is what happens. (The president has been eager to underscore this message. Sunday afternoon, in another tweet attacking the federal judge who blocked his travel ban, he darkly cited, ''People pouring in. Bad!'')

Now, if you've ever watched ''24,'' you know that every one of these story lines is subject to change. There will be twists on twists, good guys may turn out bad and vice versa. (A story line in later episodes screened for critics raises the question of scapegoating.) ''24: Legacy'' could surprise us; indeed, that's pretty much its job.

But that's a message in itself: You can never be certain. Isn't it smarter to err on the safe side? It's not that the show argues all Muslims are bad. It's that it suggests any Muslim might be bad.

The best defense of ''24'' might be that it's an absurd fantasy, where America has survived multiple nuclear attacks and major cities are free of traffic snarls. No one considers it a documentary.

That's true, but not the whole truth. People may not take ''24'' literally. But many take it the way people often take entertainments -- as a cartoonish version of something real.

The most obvious example is the show's popularizing of the ''ticking time bomb'' justification for torture, dismissed by terrorism experts. (In the ''24: Legacy'' premiere, it's the terrorists who torture and coerce information out of their captives.)

Our president, evidently, is a believer. Sean Hannity recently asked him if ABC's David Muir -- who had questioned Mr. Trump about waterboarding -- would use the technique if a kidnapper had taken his child.

''Or would you want him to talk in 48 hours from now, by being nice to him?'' Mr. Trump responded. ''And by that time, it's too late.''

Over the years, ''24'' wrestled with the responsibility of its characterizations. It introduced sympathetic Muslim characters and spread the villainy around: Serbians, Chinese, Russians and the evil president Logan.

Its descendant ''Homeland'' -- co-produced by Howard Gordon, an original producer of ''24'' and an executive producer on the reboot -- has taken pains to consult intelligence experts. They have advised, for the current season set in New York, that Al Qaeda and the Islamic State (also known as ISIS) lack the capability to pull off the kind of coordinated plot in the United States that the ''24: Legacy'' pilot set up. The season focuses on the case of a young Brooklyn Muslim, arrested for posting incendiary videos.

''24: Legacy'' works on a different level of realism, and it probably expected to appear in a different world. Had Hillary Clinton won the presidency, we'd be talking about the implications of casting an African-American hero, or how incongruous it looks for the show's presidential candidate (Jimmy Smits) to be a man. The show's stereotyping would be the same, but we would not be seeing stereotyping's consequences playing out in real life the way they are now.

But that's not where we are. Nor are we even in the post-9/11 heyday of ''24,'' when George W. Bush stressed that Islam was a ''religion of peace.'' Mr. Trump is under the sway of those who see all of Islam as an enemy, advisers like Stephen K. Bannon, who has said, ''Islam is not a religion of peace -- Islam is a religion of submission,'' at war with the ''Judeo-Christian West.''

This wasn't the only vision of America on display in the past week. Anheuser-Busch prepared a Budweiser commercial celebrating the brand's founder, a German immigrant, for overcoming xenophobia to create an American icon. The ad went viral days before the Super Bowl.

''24: Legacy'' may not have meant to enlist in this culture war. But anyone telling this kind of story now might be supplying rhetorical ammo to people who dream of making America smaller, meaner, more homogeneous and more afraid.

Does ''24'' want that to be its legacy?

Corey Hawkins in the Fox drama ''24: Legacy,'' which began on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GUY D'ALEMA/FOX) (C1); Miranda Otto in the Fox drama ''24: Legacy,'' which debuted Sunday on Fox after the Super Bowl. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL BECKER/FOX) (C6) 

Document NYTF000020170206ed2600053
