World News: Mosul Emerges, One Business at a Time --- In Iraq'a second- largest city,  ISIS  is kicked out and commerce kicks in

By Asa Fitch in Mosul, Iraq, and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
869 words
5 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Now that security forces have driven Islamic State from Mosul, money changer Ayman Younis is back in business, helping traders buy imports from Turkey.

It is just one of the signs that the economy in Iraq's second-largest city is coming back to life after three years under the extremists, who stifled private business by controlling trade and restricting who could take part in it -- and were known to execute independent money changers.

Many challenges lie ahead, from demining to rebuilding, and the overarching sentiment in the northern Iraqi business community is far from positive. Many business owners are putting off investment decisions as they wait for the bulk of reconstruction to begin.

But Iraq's next big battle -- the resurrection of its cities -- is shifting into gear. Some residents are returning to Mosul, and businesses including grocers, furniture sellers and construction-material suppliers are welcoming the revived demand for their goods.

"They are trying to establish a foothold," said Mus'ab Mohammed, 30 years old, the manager of the Al Alamia supermarket, which reopened after Iraqi forces took control of the area early this year. Al Alamia is now fully stocked with food and household goods, many of which were banned or unavailable under Islamic State.

Iraqi security forces have driven the extremists from Mosul, and on Thursday Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared the nearby town of Tal Afar "fully liberated." The only significant areas of Iraq still under Islamic State control are Hawija, a rural area between Baghdad and Mosul, and the mostly desert region around the Qaim border crossing with Syria.

Around 834,000 residents of Mosul were displaced, out of a pre-ISIS two million, but as of Thursday around 30% had returned, according to the U.N.'s International Organization for Migration.

When the extremists occupied Mosul in 2014, Mr. Younis, who is 45, said he shut his currency exchange and focused on self-preservation, not wealth-generation.

For those years, there were "only some narrow-minded people controlling you," he said, seated at his desk in a white shirt, a calculator in front of him and a bill-counting machine to his left. "Now there is government and law. Hopefully things will be better."

The challenges are significant. Many neighborhoods were leveled by fighting. Business owners complain that security is still shaky, with the lingering threat of Islamic State mines and terrorist attacks. Consumers, particularly government employees whose salaries were cut off in 2015, have little to spend. Industrial areas where Islamic State manufactured weapons have been destroyed.

Amer Gargaja, a food wholesaler, said his warehouse in western Mosul was demolished. He said he won't rebuild until the government ensures security and gives compensation to those whose property was destroyed.

Qutaiba Shanshal, a clothing wholesaler, also said state support was necessary "to get the economic cycle running again." He said Islamic State's occupation had virtually destroyed Mosul's economy, which was already on uneven footing. "I'll try to resume my business, but not at the same size," he said.

Mr. Abadi's government estimates the reconstruction will cost more than $100 billion over the next 10 years. It has provided no breakdown of what is needed and where. While Iraq has significant oil reserves, a moderation in oil prices and the cost of the Islamic State fight have spread revenue thin.

Even before rebuilding begins, Iraqi leaders face the more pressing demands of how to finish off Islamic State and help the 3.26 million people who fled the conflict.

Several international efforts aim to aid reconstruction. The World Bank's International Finance Corporation is helping train members of Iraqi boards of directors on global best practices. Some Iraqi officials and executives promoted business opportunities at a July conference in London. Now, Iraqi officials and business leaders are looking to a donor conference set for January in Kuwait to provide a boost.

A big risk is unexploded ordnance. The militants used some factories as military facilities and laid explosives across many Iraqi cities and towns to prevent government forces and the U.S.-led military coalition from fully reclaiming territory. The thousands of explosives also prevent the return of displaced residents.

"It was almost like they thought 'OK, we can't own it, so you can't either,' " said David Johnson, a vice president at Janus Global, which is carrying out a countrywide demining program for the U.S. State Department. "It's like biblical times, salting the earth."

Recovery in Mosul will be difficult. A cement factory in the Hamam al Alil district of the city was once one of the biggest employers in Mosul and one of the largest cement producers in the country.

Janus finished demining the factory in July. But with Mosul still crawling out from under years of occupation and war, no investors have stepped up yet to restart the factory.

---

Ali A. Nabhan in Mosul contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170904ed950000s
