Business
CMO Today: The Guardian Pulls its Google Ads Over Content Worries; Here's your morning roundup of the biggest marketing, advertising and media industry news and happenings.

By Mike Shields 
1,128 words
17 March 2017
12:43
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

GOOFLE: If you follow the online advertising business, you probably wouldn't be shocked to hear about another marketer ending up next to dicey digital content after its ads were placed by an ad tech middleman. But what if Google was involved? The Guardian reported it pulled all of its ads from Google and YouTube because they were found adjacent to extremist content after its agency used Google's programmatic ad exchange. Google responded that it has strict guidelines about where ads should appear and admitted it doesn't always get it right. But the Guardian isn't alone. A month ago, Jaguar yanked its ads after they were spotted on YouTube next to ISIS videos. Even the U.K.

 government has pulled ads from Google. Google's U.K. and Ireland managing director noted in a blog post Friday that while Google last year removed nearly 2 billion bad ads and more than 100,000 publishers from its systems, "we need to do a better job." He also said the company has launched a thorough review of its ad policies, reports Business Insider. If Google can't get this right, who can?

KICKING THE TV HABIT: Marketers worried about the still scruffy nature of digital ads can always stick with TV, right? Not if they want to reach young people, who are much more inclined to consume content on mobile devices, says Adidas CEO Kasper Rorsted, who boasted that the brand is planning to ditch TV entirely as it tries to boost e-commerce revenue. "Digital engagement is key for us; you don't see any TV advertising any more," he told CNBC. Sounds bold. Actually, Adidas has run ads in the U.S. this year as part of a campaign featuring Snoop Dogg, reports Business Insider, though the athletic brand still ranked only 511th by analytics firm iSpotTV's count when it came to TV spending over the last month. Mr. Rorsted clearly wanted to talk up his company's innovative, mobile-first strategy while appearing on TV. But there's also the chance this is the beginning of youth-focused marketers seriously rethinking their media budget allocations.

HOME INVASION: It's a tale as old as time. A new medium emerges, consumers adopt it, and then advertisers follow. Is that already happening with those home digital assistants everyone's so excited about? Well, technically, no. Google's voice-controlled Google Home speakers surprised users Thursday with an unprompted voice promotion for Walt Disney Co.'s new live action movie "Beauty and the Beast." But Disney didn't pay for the promotions, which Google says aren't ads, even though they sure sound like them to consumers, reports The Wall Street Journal. One person who heard the promotion called it "jarring" and said advertising on the device "would really ruin the experience." By Thursday afternoon, the movie promotion had been removed. Everyone always says they don't like ads on new devices, at least initially. Google, known for expertly delivering ads people want, has to find a way for promotions on Home devices to be a timely, customized utility for consumers.

MCRIB: Marketing and public relations firms are already preparing strategies for if and when President Donald Trump mentions one of their clients in a tweet. What happens if a brand's own Twitter feed takes on Mr. Trump? That's where McDonald's found itself on Thursday, when its verified corporate account called Mr. Trump a "disgusting excuse for a president" and pined for the return of Barack Obama, reports Vice News. The tweet was deleted 19 minutes later. Did somebody go rogue at Mickey D's? Nope. According to McDonald's, the account was hacked, reports WSJ and Adweek. A brief effort on Twitter to boycott the fast-food chain fizzled quickly, but it remains to be seen if the brand will take any sort of long-term hit. Some may find the security incident on Twitter disconcerting, especially given how often the platform is used by a certain leader of the free world.

Elsewhere

Shortly after bringing nude photography back to Playboy after a yearlong hiatus, the magazine is notifying some of its readers with discounted subscriptions that they will no longer receive the print edition. It's an effort to only sell full-price print editions and shift to digital as business pressures intensify. [WSJ]

For the first time in its 42-year history, NBC's "Saturday Night Live" will air live across the country. The comedy franchise is trying this out for the next four episodes, which means viewers on the West Coast won't be subjected to tons of social-media spoilers when Melissa McCarthy hosts. [CMO Today]

This year at the NewFronts—igital media's version of the upfronts—Yahoo bows out, and Twitter is in. The beleaguered social media company plans to use the annual ad sales marathon to showcase its growing number of live video partnerships. [Video Ink]

Vevo is rolling out Watch Party, which lets large groups of viewers watch music videos at the same time. [Variety]

President Trump's proposed budget, which calls for the elimination of funding for many agencies including the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, could end up knocking many local public radio and television stations off the air, supporters argue. There's still lots of lobbying to come as Congress takes up the budgeting process. [WSJ]

As part of a deal with Turner, Snapchat plans to produce over 30 compilations of videos shot by fans throughout the NCAA men's basketball tournament, which tipped off this week. Turner will also encourage TV viewers to share photos and videos on Snapchat that can be used in "Our Stories"—reviously known as Live Stories. [Adweek]

YouTube has signed a multiyear deal with the e-sports company FaceIt to live stream professional videogame competitions from the Esports Championship Series (ECS). [Reuters]

British regulators plan to take a thorough look at 21st Century Fox's proposed $14 billion bid to buy the remaining 61% of the pay TV giant Sky PLC it doesn't already own. Regulators want to examine how the deal might impact the country's broadcasting standards and the diversity of voices on the air. (Fox shares common ownership with Wall Street Journal parent company News Corp.) [WSJ]

About Us

Follow us on Twitter: @wsjCMO, @digitalshields, @VranicaWSJ, @JackMarshall, @alexbruell, @srabil, @asharma

Subscribe to our morning newsletter, delivered straight to your inbox, at http://on.wsj.com/CMOTodaySignup.

Write to Mike Shields at mike.shields@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170317ed3h0008u
