World News:  ISIS -Linked Filipino Killed

By Jake Maxwell Watts 
438 words
17 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA -- One of the U.S.'s most-wanted terrorists was among the last remaining leaders killed after Philippine forces pressed forward with their offensive to retake the southern city of Marawi from Islamic State-linked militants, authorities said.

The bodies of Isnilon Hapilon -- who was on the U.S. Department of Justice list of most-wanted terrorists world-wide, with a reward of as much as $5 million for his capture -- and Omar Maute were recovered on Monday after the two leaders were killed as they moved between concrete structures and mosques in the city's old central business district with a few dozen other fighters and hostages, government spokesman Ernesto Abella said.

The two were leading a last stand against government troops in Marawi, officials said.

Hapilon was involved in several kidnappings, including the 2001 abduction from an island resort of 20 people, U.S. authorities say.

The deaths of Hapilon and Maute are a long-awaited victory for the government forces, who, inexperienced in urban combat, have struggled to clear the city since it was occupied in the name of Islamic State by hundreds of heavily armed fighters in May.

The armed forces said their offensive had boxed the remaining militant-controlled area to just a few acres even before the two leaders were killed.

The remaining combatants "were seen scampering in disarray," the armed forces said. "It will be a matter of days before it can finally be declared that Marawi has been liberated from the clutches of terrorists."

The two leaders had been a target for the military since the reported death last month of Maute's brother, Abdullah -- though no body was found to confirm his demise. The brothers were local to the province and rallied a coalition of fighters under the Islamic State flag to occupy the city.

Hapilon led his own group of fighters, a faction of the Abu Sayyaf Group, which swore allegiance to Islamic State in 2014 and joined the Maute brothers in their occupation of the city. Islamic State leadership later named Hapilon as its "emir," or ruler, in the Philippines.

The remaining militants in Marawi, numbering about 30, the military said, have few among them with a status similar to the Maute brothers' or Hapilon's. The de facto leader, some analysts say, is likely to be Mahmud Ahmad, a Malaysian whose links to Islamic State in the Middle East made him the militants' primary foreign recruiter. The army says he is still thought to be in Marawi.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171017edah00017
