World
Iraqi Forces Close to Controlling Mosul Airport; Push marks major step in fight to retake city's western side from Islamic State

By Ben Kesling and Awadh Altaie 
600 words
23 February 2017
20:56
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—raqi military forces were nearly in control of Mosul's international airport on Thursday, Iraqi military officials said, a major step in their fight to retake the Islamic State-held western side of the city.

By sunset, troops came under occasional mortar fire by the extremists and prepared for the next day's push on dense Islamic State-controlled neighborhoods just beyond the airport. Iraqi commandos also attacked a former government military base next to the airport complex, sweeping through farmland along the Tigris river, the officials said.

"Now the battle for the west side has started," said Brig. Yahya Rasool, spokesman for Iraq's joint operations command, after meeting with other top officials near the front.

The highly symbolic victory gives Iraqi forces a foothold in the center of western Mosul, on the outskirts of which they have battled for days to push back Islamic State.

The extremist group seized Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, in June 2014. It was there that its leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi proclaimed a caliphate straddling Iraq and Syria.

The government offensive to remove the extremists from their last major urban stronghold in Iraq began in October in the city's east.

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces suffered heavy casualties as they recaptured eastern Mosul, declaring it fully retaken last month.

Following a weekslong pause to regroup, they announced Sunday the start of ground operations to reclaim areas of western Mosul. Troops quickly retook the strategic outlying village of Albu Saif, which sits on high ground next to the airport.

On Thursday, "we broke the enemy's defense lines," said Col. Falah al-Webdan, a commander with the elite Emergency Response Division, which is at the front.

"The real fighting will start tomorrow," he added, referring to his troops' mission to start assaulting the first dense neighborhoods inside the western half of the city.

At a U.S.-supported aid station near the front, U.S. and Western allied medics treated a line of Iraqi troops suffering shrapnel and explosion wounds.

The fight for western Mosul is expected to involve house-to-house fighting in dense older neighborhoods and the use of some of the hundreds of thousands of civilians who remain there as human shields by Islamic State fighters.

"We can't use tanks or heavy artillery because of civilians," Brig. Rasool said.

Civilians in the west are already feeling the effects of the approaching fight.

Volunteer medics manning front-line aid stations said some 40 civilians were treated Thursday for wounds from shrapnel and explosions, and that five had died either on the way to the clinic or while being treated. One corpse was brought in on the back of a donkey, medics said.

Iraqi troops organized buses for women and children from western Mosul to be transported to camps for displaced people. Civilian men were loaded onto the back of military flatbeds to be screened to make sure they weren't extremists.

Fathay Ahmed squatted by the side of the crowded bus as her young son vomited in the dirt with an unknown ailment. She said her other son, who had a mental illness, had been killed hours earlier.

"He just ran toward Iraqi troops," the 45-year-old said. "An [improvised explosive device] went off and killed him."

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* Rebels Claim Capture of Syrian City From \b ISIS\b0 

Document WSJO000020170223ed2n00335
