World
Pakistan and Afghanistan Look to Coordinate on Counterterrorism; Proposed effort comes as the U.S. reviews its Afghanistan policy, considers increasing troops there

By Saeed Shah in Islamabad and Dion Nissenbaum in Washington 
1,065 words
10 July 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Kabul and Islamabad have agreed to work on a mechanism to jointly combat insurgents along their shared border, cooperating more closely than they have in years as the U.S. prepares to ramp up its troop numbers in Afghanistan, according to Pakistani and Afghan officials.

The move, seen as necessary to halting the flow of fighters fueling a Taliban insurgency , would be an important step in the struggle to stabilize Afghanistan.

Washington has long tried to get Pakistan and Afghanistan to work together to squeeze Taliban militants. A visiting U.S. Senate delegation led by John McCain (R., Ariz.) helped push the two nations into discussions last week.

The Pakistani offer to resurrect joint counterterrorism operations comes ahead of a review by the Trump administration of American policy toward Afghanistan , expected to be completed this month, that could be tough on Islamabad. The U.S.-Pakistan relationship  has come to be defined by the security situation in Afghanistan, and many in Washington blame Islamabad for havens along its border that have allowed the Taliban insurgency in Afghanistan to survive and strengthen. Both Islamabad and Kabul have accused each other of allowing hostile factions to operate in their territories.

Pakistan says it has cleared extremist sanctuaries on its soil and its security worries in Afghanistan have never been addressed by Kabul and Washington. Islamabad sees a failing U.S. and Afghan strategy at fault for what American commanders describe as a "stalemate" on the battlefield.

Washington and Kabul, meanwhile, accuse Islamabad of using the Taliban and the allied Haqqani network as its proxies in Afghanistan, to counter the influence of its foe India there. Pakistan denies the charge.

The new coordinated effort comes as President Donald Trump and his aides are considering new ways to push Islamabad into doing more to help the U.S., including punitive measures to limit aid to Pakistan and to strip the country of its status as a major non-NATO ally.

"U.S. achievements in Afghanistan have lot to do with support from and through Pakistan. Any unilateral U.S. action will be anti to our existing cooperation and disadvantageous for peace and stability in the region," said Maj. Gen. Asif Ghafoor, the spokesman of Pakistan's military. "Pakistan is part of the solution, not part of the problem."

The proposed cooperation, conveyed to Kabul in recent days via the visiting senators, would see Pakistan and Afghanistan forces coordinate operations on their respective territories to tackle militants who move back and forth across the border, known as the Durand Line, Maj. Gen. Ghafoor said. Border coordination centers would be established, with officers from the other country stationed there. Pakistan is already fencing parts of the border, on which it has deployed 200,000 soldiers.

"This is a shift in Pakistan's policy," a senior Afghan security official said. "We welcome it and look forward to some practical results."

The plan envisages the U.S. monitoring and verifying the coordinated border operations. A senior official at the U.S.-led Resolute Support military coalition said it was too early to comment on the idea but added: "We have the capacity to do this, if it comes to fruition."

But Pakistan's border-security proposals were met skeptically by some current and former U.S. officials, who view them as a sign that Islamabad isn't taking the depth of American concerns seriously.

"This does not look like a road into new territory," a former Trump administration official said. "There isn't anything new in the ideas of coordinated action and third-party verification. The former is Pakistani code for pointing to Afghan military failings, and the latter is Afghan code for 'We want the Americans to blame the Pakistanis.' "

The Trump administration's policy review for Afghanistan has been slowed by an internal debate over how to deal with Pakistan, according to current and former U.S. officials. There appears to be broad support in the administration for a tougher approach to Pakistan, though there has been no agreement on how far to press Islamabad. At least one faction is concerned that such steps could backfire.

"Too many sticks, too much pressure, could create a worse overall dynamic," a second former Trump administration official said.

Afghan officials said they would like China, seen as a country Islamabad listens to, to play a role in verifying the operations and prodding Pakistan to crack down on the Taliban . Chinese foreign minister Wang Yi last month shuttled between Islamabad and Kabul to encourage the two sides to collaborate on counterterrorism and to search for a peace settlement with the Taliban , according to a joint statement.

Until 2014, a tripartite arrangement coordinated operations along the border between Pakistan, Afghanistan and the U.S.-led coalition.

"There will be coordinated operations on both sides of the Durand Line, and the U.S. will supervise the operations. The Afghan military is working to develop a mechanism for the operation," said Dawa Khan Minapal, a spokesman for Afghan President Ashraf Ghani .

Capt. William Salvin, a spokesman for the Resolute Support coalition, said: "We are supportive of efforts to fight the scourge of terrorism on both sides of the border."

The U.S. embassy in Islamabad declined to comment. Mr. McCain's office didn't respond to requests for comment.

"Conversations with our friends in Pakistan were frank and candid, and we told them that in our view that the Haqqani having a safe zone in their country was not acceptable," Mr. McCain told a press conference in Kabul on Tuesday.

Habib Khan Totakhil and Jessica Donati in Kabul contributed to this article.

Write to Saeed Shah at saeed.shah@wsj.com  and Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com  and Dion Nissenbaum at

Related Reading

* White House Limits Pentagon on Afghan Troop Level  (July 6)

* Senators Criticize Tillerson Over Afghanistan Policy  (July 4)

* U.S. State Department to Eliminate Special Envoy to Afghanistan, Pakistan  (June 24)

* U.S. Pushes for More Troops, Leeway in Afghan Fight  (May 9)

* Taliban Broaden Their Reach in Villages Across Afghanistan  (May 8)

* In Afghanistan, Battle With \b ISIS\b0  Grinds On After 'Mother of All Bombs'  (April 17)

Document WSJO000020170710ed7a00108
