Briefing
Matt Lauer, North Korea, Reno: Your Wednesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,591 words
29 November 2017
11:39
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

Getting to a yes on tax cuts.

•epublicans sound increasingly optimistic about the fate of the Senate’ tax bill, after the Budget Committee voted along party lines on Tuesday to advance the $1.5 trillion package. Follow the latest developments on our live briefing.

Here’ what the bill would mean for 25,000 middle-class families.

With a procedural vote planned today, the Republican mood is far different from earlier this year: “t this point in the health care debate, people were walking out and talking about each other’ mamas and getting mad and it just wasn’ healthy, it wasn’ productive,”ne senator said. “t was like a bunch of kids in the back of a minivan.”

•lso on Tuesday, the effort to avert a government shutdown next month got off to a rocky start after talks between President Trump and Democratic leaders broke down.

NBC fires Matt Lauer.

•The network has dismissed Mr. Lauer, its leading morning news anchor, over a sexual harassment allegation.

Andrew Lack, the network’ president for news, said in a memo sent to staff today that a “etailed complaint from a colleague”gainst Mr. Lauer “epresented, after serious review, a clear violation of our company’ standards. As a result, we’e decided to terminate his employment.”

•r. Lauer’ co-host, Savannah Guthrie, announced the news on “oday”his morning. Appearing on the verge of tears, Ms. Guthrie said, “ll we can say is we are heartbroken; I’ heartbroken.”Read a transcript of her remarks.)

North Korea says entire U.S. is in range.

•yongyang said today that it had successfully tested a missile that could deliver nuclear warheads anywhere in the continental U.S.

President Trump said “e will handle”he situation. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis noted that the rocket “ent higher, frankly, than any previous shot they’e taken.”

•xperts said the launch underscored the increasing sophistication of North Korea’ program.

The president’ changing reality.

•resident Trump once said that the infamous “ccess Hollywood”ape of his making vulgar comments about women was authentic. Now, he’ not so sure.

“e don’ think that was my voice,”r. Trump told a senator in January. And the president has continued to seed doubt about the tape. The White House declined to comment, but some of Mr. Trump’ advisers say he harbors a handful of conspiracy theories that have no grounding in fact.

The aides say that behind closed doors, Mr. Trump has questioned former President Barack Obama’ birth certificate and claimed that he lost the popular vote last year because of fraud.

•his morning, the president shared videos on Twitter supposedly portraying Muslims committing acts of violence. The images were originally posted by a far-right activist in Britain.

Gunman opens fire in Reno.

•An assailant took a hostage and opened fire from the eighth floor of a luxury high-rise condominium in Reno, Nev., on Tuesday, shooting for about 20 minutes onto the streets below, the authorities said.

No injuries were reported in the episode, which was reminiscent of the mass shooting in Las Vegas in October. The gunman died, though it was unclear whether he had been killed by police gunfire or had shot himself.

•eparately, the Air Force said it had failed to report dozens of service members to a federal gun background-check database as required. The Air Force also didn’ report the domestic violence conviction of the gunman in this month’ church shooting in Texas.

The diary that could upend the Olympics.

•ournals kept by a chemist provide a new level of detail about Russia’ elaborate cheating at the last Winter Olympics.

The notes, seen exclusively by The Times, are among the critical pieces of evidence that could result in Russia being absent from the next Games.

•lympic officials will announce their decision on Dec. 5.

“he Daily” The unpaid price of fighting ISIS.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•n a win for President Trump, his pick, Mick Mulvaney, will be the acting director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.

•t usually doesn’ take much to get internet users worked up. To get them really worked up, make the topic internet regulation.

That includes our tech columnist, who says that killing so-called net neutrality rules would also kill the internet as we know it.

•etail jobs don’ need to be bad, our economics columnist writes.

•.S. stocks were up on Tuesday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

• movie stylist offers tips for style on a budget.

•ow to paint your apartment, with tips from a professional.

•ecipe of the day: Hearty split pea soup can be even better with bacon. (Not all readers agreed.)

Noteworthy

•he physical internet.

In today’ 360 video, visit Herald Square in New York City, where we identify the objects that help make our online lives possible.

•ow far will Sean Hannity go?

The Fox News host is willing to defend President Trump at all costs, and he is reaching 13.5 million people a day doing it.

The Times Magazine profiled the man whom Stephen Bannon calls “he single most important voice for the ‘eplorables.’”

•gly Baby’ pretty dishes.

A memorably named Thai restaurant in Brooklyn offers items rarely seen in New York City, our critic Pete Wells writes.

•est of late-night TV.

Bernie Sanders received a Grammy nod for the audiobook version of “ur Revolution.”“e was nominated in the shouted-word category,”Seth Meyers said.

For late-night hosts, being sharply critical of President Trump has been a winning strategy. That’ bad news for Jimmy Fallon and “he Tonight Show.”

•uotation of the day.

“here’ no way we could survive if there were more fires than snakes.”

—Prayul Krongyos, deputy director of the Bangkok Fire and Rescue Department, which has responded to more than 31,000 calls about snakes this year. Some pythons have even slithered up through toilets.

Back Story

Call it the Trumpchi conundrum. China finally feels it has a car capable of following vehicles from Japan, Germany and South Korea into the U.S. market. But its biggest roadblock might be its name.

The Chinese automaker GAC Motor insists that its popular Trumpchi vehicles, which went into mass production in 2010, have nothing to do with the U.S. president.

Even so, when we reported last week on plans to sell the Trumpchi in the U.S. by 2019, GAC officials said that they might rethink the branding.

Automotive history, littered as it is with unfortunate car names, suggests this is probably a good idea.

There’ been the Mazda Scrum Wagon, the Mitsubishi Lettuce, the Nissan Homy Super Long and the Isuzu GIGA 20 Light Dump, not to be confused with the Honda Life Dunk.

Volkswagen offered the Tiguan, a mash-up of tiger and iguana, Ford shortened cougar into Kuga for some markets, and Renault famously had Le Car.

General Motors has long been ridiculed for marketing the Chevy Nova in Spanish-speaking countries, where the name translates to “oesn’ go”“o va”. The Nova actually sold well in Latin America.

GAC officials told our Shanghai bureau chief that, in Chinese, Trumpchi sounded a little like “assing on happiness.”ny decision on changing the name, they said, would be announced in January —t an auto show in Detroit.

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Sunday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia, and an Evening Briefing on weeknights. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Follow Chris Stanford on Twitter: @stanfordc.

Protesters against the proposed tax overhaul were detained on Capitol Hill on Tuesday. | Tasos Katopodis/Getty Images | At the White House on Tuesday, President Trump sat between empty seats meant for Senator Chuck Schumer and Representative Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leaders. | Doug Mills/The New York Times | Matt Lauer in New York in 2014. | Larry Busacca/Getty Images | The diary of Grigory Rodchenkov, the former director of Russia’ antidoping lab. | Hilary Swift for The New York Times | A python at a fire station in Bangkok. Most of the snakes rescued by firefighters are eventually released in the wild. | Amanda Mustard for The New York Times | A Trumpchi electric car at a motor show in Guangzhou, China, this year. | Billy H.C. Kwok for The New York Times | Although Donald Trump publicly apologized after the release of a video in which he admitted to groping women, people close to him say that privately he has expressed doubts that the voice in the recording is his. | By ROBIN LINDSAY | The writer and artist Ingrid Burrington helps us identify the physical objects that make up the internet all around us everyday. | By JOSEPHINE SEDGWICK, NICOLE FINEMAN and TIM CHAFFEE 

Document NYTFEED020171129edbt002mh
