Opinion
A Lincoln Lesson for Donald Trump; The president-elect will soon learn how little control he has over his agenda.

By Jay Winik 
1,004 words
3 January 2017
00:13
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction The Dow Jones lost 40% of its value over several months in 1937, not in one day, as an earlier version of this article incorrectly stated.

After his surprise win in the presidential election of 1860, Abraham Lincoln gathered a coterie of reporters and enthused, "Well boys, your troubles are over now; mine have only just begun." Lincoln didn't realize how prescient he was, or the challenges he would face.

In response to his assuming office, most of the South seceded from the Union. Then the crisis at Fort Sumter escalated, threatening to engulf the nation. Lincoln's cabinet vehemently favored diplomacy and evacuating Fort Sumter. But Lincoln, only weeks into his presidency, made a pivotal decision, declaring that he would "reprovision" the embattled Fort Sumter, an action that effectively launched the Civil War. Lincoln never imagined the war would continue for four terrible years.

Here, in history, lies a warning for Donald Trump. The president-elect, who has no formal political experience, will soon be buffeted by the hard truths that each of our presidents, including hallowed ones like Lincoln, invariably discover the hard way. The first is that whatever his agenda may be before taking office, the problems he will confront will almost inevitably differ from what he planned for. The second is that however involved his advisers, however enthusiastic his supporters, or however gregarious he himself may be, tumult is inherent in governing. He will never be able to elude the often paralyzing seclusion of presidential leadership.

Consider Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who relished the sport of politics and who in turn was loved by the American people for his joyful grin and his reassuring fireside chats. FDR discovered the unrelenting toll of presidential decision-making when, in the autumn of 1937, the Dow Jones plummeted nearly 40%.

FDR's confidence deserted him as the economy lost a breathtaking four million jobs, leaving Roosevelt's team to bemoan the "depression within a depression." Usually the nimblest of leaders, Roosevelt unexpectedly equivocated. He was accused of treading water, and even loyalists rued that FDR "doesn't know which way to turn."

In time Roosevelt was able to stem the economic bloodbath, but only to be confronted by the Nazi menace overrunning Europe. Outwardly, Roosevelt was resolute in waging World War II. Privately, he suffered. "I am walking on eggs," he bemoaned. One night at dinner in 1940 Roosevelt collapsed, a worrisome incident covered up by the White House.

By 1944, as Allied forces readied their epic D-Day invasion of Normandy, Roosevelt's health was so precarious that doctors gave him only a year to live. Sickly and feverish, he was forced to spend a month convalescing in South Carolina. This did not stop him from rushing back to Washington on the eve of the invasion and speaking to the American people. He knew that only the president could guide the nation at such a pivotal time. His doctors were right, and Roosevelt died in April 1945.

Here, then, are the prerequisites of the presidency. Despite the capable inner circle he is assembling, and his innate political skills, Mr. Trump will learn that the presidency is a forlorn place. For all his confidence, Mr. Trump will also discover that little is simple about governing. The presidency is more often characterized by the unanticipated, not the anticipated. Just as often, it loses its way.

Recent history powerfully tells the tale. Harry Truman learned the burdens within hours of assuming the presidency, when he was faced with the questions of whether and how to use the atomic bomb— weapon that Truman hadn't even known existed.

A youthful, slightly cocky John F. Kennedy blundered in his ill-fated summit with Nikita Khrushchev as well as in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, prompting the near-disastrous Cuban missile crisis. Lyndon Johnson, as capable a politician as there ever has been, harbored altruistic visions with his Great Society, only to be undone by the crucible of Vietnam. Richard Nixon, so sure-footed in foreign policy, was forced to resign. Jimmy Carter watched haplessly as the Soviets marched into Afghanistan and the Iranians held America hostage for 444 days. And George W. Bush, having campaigned on a platform of humility in world affairs, did an abrupt about face as he was stalked by the shadow of 9/11 and the invasion of Iraq. Barack Obama has been tormented by ISIS, Benghazi, rising health costs and Syria.

It is hard not to be impressed by President-elect Trump's enthusiasm, his seemingly endless can-do spirit and charisma, and his connection with the heartland's working man. Mr. Trump is getting down to business with the same irrepressible spirit and boldness that he has run his companies. He is clearly looking ahead.

But Mr. Trump would do well to look back toward these teachings from history too. In doing so, he will also realize that he is the steward of the precious fabric of American democracy and only one link— temporary one at that—n the chain of presidents elected to watch over the nation. Like his predecessors, he will realize that humility matters, for he will not easily be able to navigate the next great crisis looming around the corner. Whether surrounded by his team or his tightly knit family members, in the final analysis he will be rendering his decisions in near total isolation.

Lincoln once commented that there was no glory in the presidency, only "ashes and blood." Truman once said of Dwight Eisenhower, "Poor Ike . . . he'll sit here and he'll say, ‘o this! Do that!' And nothing will happen." And even George Washington, so renowned for his composure, quivered during his address to the Senate after nervously improvising in his first inauguration.

Two hundred twenty-eight years later, as Mr. Trump will learn soon enough, little has changed.

Mr. Winik, historian-in-residence at the Council on Foreign Relations, is the author of "1944: FDR and the Year That Changed History" (Simon & Schuster, 2015).

Document WSJO000020170102ed12003mn
