
World News: German Court Sentences Syrian for  ISIS  Link

By Ruth Bender 
341 words
20 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN -- A Berlin court sentenced a 20-year-old Syrian to five years in juvenile detention for being a member of Islamic State, in a trial billed as a test of Germany's capacity to weed out radicals from among the many refugees who have arrived in the past two years.

In their ruling Friday, the five judges found Shaas al-Mohammad guilty of being a member of a foreign terrorist group and violating the country's weapons laws.

The charges encompassed acts committed outside Germany, including serving as an armed guard in Islamic State's siege of the city of Deir Ezzour in eastern Syria, and offering himself as a contact person for the militant group to carry out future attacks in Europe.

He was also found guilty of passing on information, such as visitor numbers to popular tourist spots in Berlin, to a Syrian contact for possible use in targeting attacks.

"We came to the certain conviction that he was a member of IS and did not cut ties with IS despite fleeing to Germany," said the presiding judge, Andreas Muller.

A defense lawyer, Tarig Elobied, said he would appeal the verdict before Germany's Federal Court of Justice. Mr. Elobied had argued that the defendant never was a member of Islamic State but rather of a different group fighting the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad. The accused didn't testify at the trial.

The case was the first trial of a recently arrived refugee accused of colluding with terrorists since a surge in the number of asylum seekers, mostly from the Middle East and other Muslim countries.

Radicalized asylum seekers have committed several attacks since Mr. al-Mohammad was arrested in March 2016, and dozens have been arrested or charged. But security officials have been concerned that cases could be hard to prosecute given the high standard of proof required by Germany's criminal-justice system.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170520ed5k0001j
