World
20 Great Reads You Probably Missed in 2017

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,635 words
30 December 2017
04:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There was a lot of news in 2017 —ust take a look at the 750 breaking news alerts The New York Times sent this year, a 30 percent jump from last year. So we understand if you might have missed some of these great reads. Here’ a selection of some of our favorite somewhat-overlooked stories from the past year.

Inside Turkey’ Purge

As Turkey’ governing party expands the ranks of its enemies, life in a fragile democracy becomes stranger and stranger. Many Turks —ournalists, academics, Kurds and people accused of working for the exiled cleric Fethullah Gulen —ive in exile, having lost their livelihoods and their citizenship, and having been separated from their husbands and wives and children. By Suzy Hansen.

Stay, Hide or Leave? Hard Choices for Immigrants in the Heartland

Edith Rivera loved her life in Hampton, Iowa, but like many undocumented immigrants she faced a tough choice. She decided to return to Mexico, where her husband had been deported in 2015, with their American-born teenage son. Some politicians call it “elf-deportation.”he called it her family’ only hope of being together. By Jack Healy.

Can a Giant Science Fair Transform Kazakhstan’ Economy?

Kazakhstan wants to wean itself from a dependence on natural resources and transform itself into a financial hub, the Dubai of Central Asia. There are plans for a new stock exchange overseen by an independent judicial system. Tech start-ups will get the come-hither, too, with the hope of giving rise to Kazakhstan’ own version of Silicon Valley. But its president still has the trappings of an old-school authoritarian. By David Segal.

An Alabama Prison’ Unrelenting Descent Into Violence

Even by the standards of one of the nation’ most dysfunctional prison systems, the maximum-security St. Clair Correctional Facility in Alabama stood out for its violence. The prison is overcrowded, and the number of guards has plummeted. By Campbell Robertson.

Plunging His Pen Into the Dark Heart of 1980s Wall Street

With “unk,”he Pulitzer-winning playwright Ayad Akhtar examines financial chicanery in the 1980s —nd how it shaped the blind worship of affluence today. By Michael Sokolove.

Up Close With the Tribes of Ethiopia’ Imperiled Omo Valley

Home to seven main tribes, the Omo region in the southwestern corner of Ethiopia is now on the precipice. The Ethiopian government has recently completed the third of five proposed dams upriver. The dams threaten to alter the lives of the communities that have inhabited this valley for millennium and depend on the river’ moods for survival. By Andrew McCarthy.

‘hey Will Have to Answer to Us’

El Salvador’ gangs are trying to negotiate a way out of their bloody stalemate with the police. They created a gang coordination group for dialogue. They even asked a United Nations special envoy to initiate a dialogue with the government. By Azam Ahmed.

June Robles Birt, Whose Abduction at 6 Gripped the Nation, Is Dead at 87

The granddaughter of a prosperous cattle baron and real estate magnate, she vanished in broad daylight just after leaving her Tucson school on a spring day in 1934. Nineteen days later, June was found bewildered but alive in a makeshift wood-and-sheet-metal cage buried in the broiling desert. By Sam Roberts.

Things Boys Could Learn at Girl Scouts

Boy Scouts seem to emphasize doing things (activities like white-water rafting, welding and bugling) while Girl Scouts emphasize caring for others (being a good neighbor, a voice for animals, a social butterfly). As the Boy Scouts prepare to accept girls, it’ worth asking what they can learn from the Girl Scouts. By Claire Cain Miller.

Melting Arctic Ice Makes High-Speed Internet a Reality in a Remote Town

The receding Arctic ice has opened new passageways for high-speed internet cables. One of the fastest internet connections in America is arriving in Point Hope, a gravel spit in northwest Alaska, giving 700 or so residents their first taste of broadband speed. By Cecilia Kang.

With Loss of Its Caliphate, ISIS May Return to Guerrilla Roots

With the fall of its capital and loss of territory in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State may be reeling, but it is far from vanquished. Its leaders signaled more than a year ago that they had drawn up contingency plans to revert to their roots as a guerrilla force. The group also continues to inspire so-called lone wolf terrorist attacks abroad. By Margaret Coker, Eric Schmitt and Rukmini Callimachi.

In a Rohingya Refugee Camp, Soccer Is a Joyful Escape

Soccer is a prized diversion that helps players and spectators forget about their exile, at least for a few hours. They are Rohingya, a Muslim ethnic group driven from Myanmar, now living in Bangladesh. By Nathan A. Thompson.

The ‘ion King’ffect: How a Broadway Smash Changed South African Lives

Over 20 years, more than 260 South Africans, many with little formal training in singing or acting, have been dispatched all over the planet to “ion King”roductions staged in numerous languages. By Michael Paulson.

How Sicily Cemented an Unlikely Friendship

A trip to Palermo meant getting to know the city —nd a new friend —uch better. By Jami Attenberg.

‘ Smell Cash’ How the A.T.F. Spent Millions Unchecked

What began as a way to catch black-market cigarette dealers quickly transformed into a nearly untraceable slush fund that agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives could tap. By Matt Apuzzo.

How a Seed Bank, Almost Lost in Syria’ War, Could Help Feed a Warming Planet

A plant conservationist from Syria and his colleagues are safeguarding seeds that might be crucial when more parts of the world become as hot and arid as the Middle East. By Somini Sengupta.

Loving the Bodega Downstairs

The neighborhood bodega, with its surprisingly large variety of foods, beverages and sundries packed into a small space, is a quintessential part of New York City living. By Ronnie Koenig.

The Inescapable Poet of Nicaragua

Across the country where he was born more than 150 years ago, Rubé Darí, who breathed new life into the Spanish language, is honored and remembered. By Tim Neville.

From Guerrilla Fighter to Myanmar Peace Negotiator

Min Zaw Oo left the jungle to pursue a Ph.D. in the United States. Two decades later, the government invited him back to try to end the war he once fought in. By Jon Emont.

‘lee at Once’ China’ Besieged Human Rights Lawyers

The last five years have brought severe setbacks for China’ lawyers —specially those who work on the rule of law. Following a 2015 crackdown, many of the remaining members of the legal community went underground or retreated from the work. By Alex W. Palmer.

A poster of President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in Istanbul. | VII for The New York Times | Edith Rivera with her son, Steven, in Hampton, Iowa. | Tim Gruber for The New York Times | The Nur Alem in Astana, Kazakhstan, has become the symbol and centerpiece of the country’ latest attempt at creating an “pen for business”ign. | Maxim Babenko for The New York Times | The segregation unit at Alabama’ St. Clair Correctional Facility houses inmates in solitary confinement. Many have come to see the unit as a haven from the prison’ general population. | William Widmer for The New York Times | The playwright Ayad Akhtar in New York in August. His new play, “unk,”oncerns Wall Street in the 1980s. | Vincent Tullo for The New York Times | Hamar tribespeople and tourists head to a bull-jumping ceremony in Ethiopia’ Omo Valley. | Andy Haslam for The New York Times | Santiago, a senior member of a gang called the 18th Street Southerners, in El Salvador. | Moises Saman/Magnum, for The New York Times | June Robles in an undated photograph. Her abduction in 1934 became a nationwide sensation. | Times Wide World Photos | Point Hope, Alaska, a town of about 700 residents, is one of the oldest continuously inhabited communities of North America. | Ruth Fremson/The New York Times | Syrian Democratic Forces fighters in Raqqa looking for Islamic State fighters. The Islamic State may be losing its capital but not its bite. | Ivor Prickett for The New York Times | Mohammed Ismail, a second-generation Rohingya refugee, during a soccer game in the Kutupalong refugee camp in Bangladesh this month. His parents fled violence in their native Myanmar. | Allison Joyce for The New York Times | Mduduzi Madela putting on his lion mask before going onstage as Simba in “he Lion King”n Broadway. | Sara Krulwich/The New York Times | The view through the Porta Nuova, an arch that dates to the 1500s, in Palermo in Sicily. | Susan Wright for The New York Times | A warehouse in Bristol, Va., used by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives during a seven-year undercover tobacco operation. | Jacob Biba for The New York Times | Ali Shehadeh, a plant conservationist from Syria who fled the war in his country, at work in Terbol, Lebanon. | Diego Ibarra Sanchez for The New York Times | Joseph Martinez lives upstairs from the Franklin Corner Cafe in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. | Dave Sanders for The New York Times | Rubé Darí’ homeland is a place of volcanoes and lakes, like the Concepció volcano and Lake Nicaragua, above. | Federico Rios Escobar for The New York Times | Min Zaw Oo, a peace negotiator, in Chiang Mai, Thailand, in July. Mr. Min returned to Myanmar in 2012 after 21 years in exile. | Adam Dean for The New York Times | Xie Yanyi, one of the lawyers detained in the 709 crackdown. | Giulia Marchi for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171230edcu00105
