Politics
Ash Carter Says Putin Is Making It Harder for U.S. to Work With Russia; Outgoing defense secretary's appraisal of Moscow's behavior in Syria and beyond stands in contrast with President-elect Trump's

By Gerald F. Seib 
953 words
6 January 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ussia has done nothing to help defeat Islamic State forces in Syria and has adopted a strategy of "explicitly thwarting the U.S." elsewhere, outgoing Defense Secretary Ash Carter said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.

Mr. Carter, who has a long history of working with Russian officials over the course of his career, said Russian President Vladimir Putin's efforts to blunt American influence have been increasing and are making it harder to find areas in which Washington and Moscow can work together.

"I think it is something that has grown steadily under Putin's leadership," he said. "It seems to be part of his self-conception. And one of the ways he defines the success of his policy is not by results on the ground but the level of the discomfort he can create in the rest of the world and show to his people as the point of his policy."

He added, "That's what makes it so difficult to build a bridge" to Russia's leaders.

Mr. Carter, who will leave his Pentagon office as President-elect Donald Trump takes over later this month, said he wasn't attempting to advise the incoming administration. But his appraisal of Russian behavior, in Syria and beyond, stands in stark contrast with the analysis Mr. Trump and some of his advisers have offered of Russia generally and Mr. Putin specifically.

Mr. Trump has said he admires Mr. Putin as a leader, has said he would like a better relationship with Russia in general, and has specifically cited Russia as a potential ally in defeating Islamic State forces.

But Mr. Carter bluntly said the Russian military, as it has taken on an increasingly assertive role in shoring up Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in recent months, has been unhelpful in the fight against Islamic State forces, also known by the acronym ISIL.

"They haven't done anything to fight ISIL," he said. "They've been fighting the moderate opposition along with the Syrian government. Everything they've done has been wrong headed and completely the obverse of what they said they were going to do."

Russian leaders also haven't fulfilled their promise to use their foothold in Syria to "facilitate a transition" away from the Assad regime to a broader government that includes the moderate opposition to Mr. Assad, Mr. Carter said.

"They haven't done that," he said. "They haven't facilitated that transition. They've just doubled down on the civil war."

As Mr. Carter's comments suggest, Russia has emerged as the national-security issue on which the contrast between the outgoing Obama administration and the incoming Trump administration is most striking. His remarks come as leaders from Mr. Trump's own Republican Party have begun hearings to examine Russian hacking operations allegedly designed to disrupt the 2016 presidential election. Mr. Trump, unlike others in the GOP, has been dismissive of intelligence community assessments of Russia's covert interference in the election process.

Asked whether the incoming president and his team are taking an overly rosy view of the role Russia is playing in Syria, Mr. Carter replied: "I can't speak for them, and they'll have to establish their own set of views on that matter. But I've been working on and with Russia for a quarter-century now since the end of the Cold War."

Mr. Carter said he has tried to adopt a policy of being "strong and balanced" with Russia and being willing to work with the Kremlin when that is possible. And he cited the threats from North Korea and Iran as two areas where that has happened.

He did encourage the new Congress and administration to continue funding programs designed to help European allies—articularly on the eastern edge of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization—efend against potential Russian interference.

"I am confident that is a necessary thing to do, and we have to continue to invest in it," he said. "We'll have to show the leadership in Europe that keeps NATO together, because one of the Russian objectives is to split off or try to peel off individual members of the alliance. It's always been an objective, it remains an objective."

Despite what he described as a lack of Russian help combating Islamic State, Mr. Carter said he was optimistic that the U.S. and its allies are prevailing in the effort to defeat the extremist group's forces. The key to prevailing, he said, is to retake the Iraqi city of Mosul and the Syrian city of Raqaa, which Islamic State forces claim as the capital of their self-proclaimed caliphate.

"I'm confident that's the right path, and that those two cities will fall," he said. "And that will go a considerable distance toward eliminating the fact of an Islamic state based on ISIL's ideology in Iraq and Syria—ut also the idea that such a thing has a future and will be tolerated."

Write to Gerald F. Seib at jerry.seib@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Excerpts: Carter on Russia, \b ISIS\b0 , North Korea and Trump

* Top Intelligence Official: High Confidence Russia Behind Hacks

* FBI Director Comey to Brief Trump on Russian Hacking Friday

* Donald Trump Plans Revamp of Top U.S. Spy Agency

* Trump Defense Nominee James Mattis Resigns From Theranos Board

Document WSJO000020170106ed1600335
