Books
Tell Us 5 Things About Your Book: Judith Matloff on Why Mountains Attract War

By JOHN WILLIAMS 
844 words
21 March 2017
21:15
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

No one would describe mountains as easy places. But the dangers documented in Judith Matloff’ new book, “o Friends but the Mountains,”o beyond the expected rough terrain. Matloff, a veteran war correspondent, was curious why so many of the world’ conflicts take place in mountainous regions. To get a better understanding, she traveled to Albania, Mexico and other places. In the first installment of a new interview series, Matloff tells us about the inspiration for the book, what she learned while writing it and more.

When did you first get the idea to write this book?

JUDITH MATLOFF Over three decades as a foreign correspondent, whether I was writing about rebellion or drug cartels or massacres, I invariably found myself in mountains. These assignments required hiking boots and tablets for altitude sickness. Yet I only made the connection between terrain and conflict during the most prosaic moment, at home in flatland Manhattan. I was playing a round of the board game Risk with my 11-year-old son and husband, and that afternoon, as we battled over Afghanistan —ho hasn’ over the centuries? —ur son, Anton, asked me where people were currently fighting. I marked about two dozen places off the top of my head, and threw in a few more spots that had seen strife over the past century. On a globe that showed elevations, Anton traced the surface with his finger and made notes on a pad, so absorbed that he failed to notice his father rampaging through the Himalayas to take China. “osovo, Chechnya, Kashmir, Chiapas,”nton recited, among others, checking the altitude key for each. “ost occur in mountains. Why?”

I decided to find out.

What’ the most surprising thing you learned while writing it?

MATLOFF: That people from mountains spanning the Atlas to the Andes feel an intense affinity with each other. They have even formed a global organization, the World Mountain People Association. No such network exists for desert dwellers or islanders. The WMPA gathers highlanders from 70 countries, who meet on a different slope each year to discuss a shared “ountain identity”nd grievances over flatland chauvinism. The group convinced me that topography plays a role in shaping lifestyle and outlook. A sherpa and a shepherd from the Pyrenees will both describe a deep spiritual connection to the land and similar personality traits: insularity, self-reliance, a gift for improvisation, a suspicion of outsiders.

In what way is the book you wrote different from the book you set out to write?

MATLOFF: I initially envisaged a prescriptive policy book that would examine why mountains were prone to persistent violence. I delved deep into literature and history to understand these islands in the sky. The book took on a more anecdotal complexion when I began field research. I couldn’ resist describing the drama of the landscape and the lives of people. The isolated mountains entrapped both inhabitants and invaders. Colombian fighters stuck on a ridge squeezed water from moss as supplies ran out. A bold geriatric inspired Nepal’ Rai indigenous people to fight construction of a dam. American soldiers collapsed from oxygen starvation in Afghanistan. Blood feuds prevented Albanian teens from leaving their houses to attend school. I wanted to evoke the crack of avalanches, the vertigo, the smell of wood smoke and fear.

Who is a creative person (not a writer) who has influenced you and your work

MATLOFF: My father. He inspired me to write both light and dark. Dad deployed as a teen to fight Hitler, and he spent his adult years obsessing over war. As a child I watched films about concentration camps and General George Patton, which no doubt influenced my choice of topics later on. But my father also was a jokester who drew hilarious cartoons and urged me not to take myself too seriously. My work embodies these contradictory aspects. This book —ike my first, about the Angolan civil war —xamines why people fight, a topic that my late father would have loved to debate, no doubt. Yet I also seize upon absurd moments, as that’ as much a part of the human condition as misery.

Persuade someone to read it in less than 50 words.

MATLOFF: Danger, like water, cascades down from mountains. They house 10 percent of the world’ population but account for a disproportionate number of its conflicts. Highlands provide sanctuary to ISIS, cocaine barons, Al Qaeda and countless insurgents. You better pay attention because those hills threaten world peace.

This interview, conducted by email, has been condensed and edited.

Correction: March 22, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of the introduction to this interview erroneously included one country in a list of places to which Judith Matloff traveled to gather material for her book. The book’ account of Afghanistan was based on secondary sources.

Judith Matloff | Glenn Jussen 

Document NYTFEED020170321ed3l007n1
