World
Lebanon Kicks Out Islamic State, in Latest Setback for Militants; Middle East nation reclaims all the territory that the extremist group controlled in the country

By Margherita Stancati 
982 words
30 August 2017
07:35
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

RAS BAALBEK, Lebanon—ne of the lesser-known chapters of Islamic State's occupation of parts of the Middle East drew to a close on Tuesday, with Lebanon reclaiming all the territory that the extremist group controlled in the country for the past three years.

Lebanese forces said they had captured the last sliver of land held by Islamic State after they launched a ground operation this month to clear the militants from the roughly 120 square kilometers of rugged mountain terrain near the border with Syria where they were based.

"All the lands are now Lebanese and secure," Lebanese Army Brig. Gen. Fadi Daoud, who commanded troops during the ISIS offensive, said in an interview on Tuesday.

Lebanon is the latest in a string of military defeats for Islamic State. The extremist group has lost more than half of the territory it captured three years ago in a blitz across Iraq and Syria.

It recently lost its Iraqi stronghold of Mosul and was defeated this past weekend in the strategic town of Tal Afar near Iraq's border with Syria. The militants are also rapidly losing ground in Raqqa, their de facto capital in Syria.

The victory for the U.S.-trained and equipped Lebanese forces was an important milestone, removing a threat that had been hanging over Lebanon for years. It also helped boost the reputation of the army, which has struggled to demonstrate it can be the sole guarantor of the country's security.

"The Lebanese army has proved itself. It has shown it can take on Islamic State," said Fawaz Gerges, a Lebanese academic and author of "ISIS: A History." "This isn't just a battle. Islamic State has suffered a lasting defeat in Lebanon. It has lost its foothold."

Islamic State militants were allowed to evacuate Lebanese territory on Monday under terms of a controversial surrender deal brokered by the Iran-backed Lebanese militia Hezbollah. Hezbollah is the most powerful group in Lebanon, and it has played a vital role on the Syrian battlefield propping up the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

In the operation, Hezbollah and the Lebanese army both contributed to beating back the Sunni extremists of Islamic State from the country's borders. Syrian forces and Hezbollah pressed their own offensive against Islamic State from the Syrian side of the border at the same time as the Lebanese army fought on their side.

Hezbollah's deal with Islamic State drew criticism from many in the country, who saw this as a humiliation. The Lebanese military denies cooperating with Hezbollah.

Lebanon has suffered from spillover of the conflict in neighboring Syria that has been going on for more than six years. Islamic State established a foothold along the country's largely uninhabited northeast and briefly overran the border town of Arsal in 2014. Its fighters kidnapped 30 Lebanese soldiers and policemen, most of whom were later released in a prisoner swap.

But the fate of nine missing soldiers remained unknown. On Sunday as part of the surrender agreement with Hezbollah, Islamic State revealed the location of eight of their bodies in return for being allowed to evacuate with their family members.

Around 600 people on Monday departed on buses for the eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, which is one of the terror group's last strongholds. Lebanese military officials say they believe the ninth soldier had joined Islamic State and was later killed in a battle in Syria.

The offensive was a test for the state's army to prove its ability to secure the country. But despite repeated assurances from government officials that the military would lead the battle to clear Islamic State from the border region, Hezbollah played an important role.

Hezbollah frequently points to the Lebanese military's weakness as a reason for its existence. But critics accuse the militia of undermining the military to preserve its leading role protecting the country.

"We would have won. The victory would have been complete and we would have captured senior leaders of Daesh [ISIS]. This didn't happen and the responsibility is of the Lebanese government," said Khalil Helou, a retired Lebanese Army general who informally advised military commanders during the operation. "Our army did a great job, but its success was overshadowed by this humiliating deal."

Many observers credited Lebanese security forces with a success in having largely contained the threat and appeal of Islamic State in the country over the past few years. While there have been exceptions, such as bombings in 2015 in the capital Beirut that killed 43 people, Lebanon has remained relatively untouched by the kind of violence the group has unleashed elsewhere.

Backed by airstrikes, Lebanese ground troops began advancing against Islamic State on Aug. 19, gradually capturing hilltop positions held by the group in the mountain area that straddles the Syrian border. Some 120 Islamic State fighters and seven Lebanese troops died in the fighting, the Lebanese military said.

During a visit on Monday to the newly liberated territory, what was left of a meal belonging to Islamic State fighters—reen pears and flatbread—as strewn around an extinguished campfire on a mountain known as "the Hill of Pigs," some 3 miles from the Syrian border. The militants abandoned the position in a hurry, leaving behind ground-to-air missile launchers and vast supplies of amphetamines.

"Part of me wanted to chase them because that is my job. Part of me wanted to protect the lives of my soldiers," said Brig. Gen. Daoud. "In the end, the mission was accomplished: We got the bodies and we liberated our land."

Leena Saidi in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170829ed8t004k0
