Trump Defends Russia Disclosure --- President says he has 'absolute right' to share information; lawmakers voice serious concerns

By Louise Radnofsky 
851 words
17 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- President Donald Trump tweeted Tuesday morning that he had the "absolute right" to share counterterrorism information with Russian officials in an Oval Office meeting, fueling a rapidly escalating controversy over reports that he divulged sensitive intelligence obtained from a U.S. ally.

"I have the absolute right" as president to share "facts pertaining to terrorism and airline flight safety," Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter .

The president wrote that he shared the information for "humanitarian reasons, plus I want Russia to greatly step up their fight against ISIS & terrorism."

The tweets offered little to mollify some lawmakers on Capitol Hill, where one leading Senate Republican said the president appeared to be changing the story in a way that was confusing and concerning, and that the allegations were problematic.

The Wall Street Journal reported late Monday that Mr. Trump divulged details about Islamic State to the Russian foreign minister and ambassador in his meeting last week in a way that revealed enough information for them potentially to compromise the source of the intelligence, according to officials, who said the intelligence came from the U.S. ally.

The Washington Post had earlier reported Mr. Trump's disclosure and that White House officials called the Central Intelligence Agency and National Security Agency to warn of Mr. Trump's disclosure and its possible consequences.

Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, Mr. Trump's national security adviser, said Tuesday at a White House briefing that the counterterrorism information that Mr. Trump shared was appropriate.

"What the president discussed with the foreign minister was wholly appropriate to that conversation," Mr. McMaster said. "It was wholly appropriate to share what the threat was in the context."

Mr. McMaster declined to answer questions on whether Mr. Trump discussed classified information with the Russian officials.

He also said that Mr. Trump "wasn't even aware of where this information came from. He wasn't briefed on the source."

Mr. McMaster said Mr. Trump didn't discuss ISIS-controlled territories that weren't already publicly known.

"It was nothing that you would not know from open-source reporting," Mr. McMaster said. "It had all to do with operations that are already ongoing have been made public for months."

Asked why White House homeland security adviser Tom Bossert had reportedly placed calls to the directors of the CIA and NSA after the meeting if Mr. Trump had not disclosed any sensitive intelligence, Mr. McMaster said he hadn't spoken with Mr. Bossert but that the adviser could have done so "out of an overabundance of caution."

He said he and other officials at the meeting, including national security adviser for strategy Dina Powell , didn't feel that the conversation was "inappropriate."

An administration official said Tuesday that Mr. Trump's tweet Tuesday didn't confirm the Post article and that it didn't address the question of whether classified information had been shared by Mr. Trump one way or the other.

According to one U.S. official, the information shared was highly sensitive and difficult to acquire and was considered extraordinarily valuable. The Journal agreed not to identify the ally because another U.S. official said it could jeopardize the source.

The White House didn't provide a detailed statement about Mr. Trump's meeting last week with Sergei Lavrov, the Russian foreign minister, and Sergei Kislyak , the Russian ambassador, which was closed to the press. A photographer from the Russian news agency TASS was in the room and published photographs.

Mr. Trump noted on Twitter that the meeting was "openly scheduled." The meeting with Mr. Lavrov was on the president's public schedule, but the schedule didn't state that Mr. Kislyak would also attend.

Later Tuesday morning, Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter that he had asked former FBI Director James Comey , whom he fired last week the day before the meeting with the Russians, and others "to find the LEAKERS in the intelligence community....."

Presidents have the legal right to declassify intelligence as they see fit. But doing so can put intelligence sources abroad in danger and make them less willing to work with the U.S., several defense officials said.

The latest disclosures stunned Washington's national-security veterans on both sides of the political divide.

Sen. John Thune (R., S.D.) called it "concerning" that "information that reveals classified national security information is shared with the Russians," although he added that there was "conflicting information."

Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D., Minn.) said the Trump administration's initial pushback on the reports indicates the White House has a recording of the meeting.

"Clearly if there is some kind of a readout or a transcript from that meeting that means there is a tape," Ms. Klobuchar said. "We need to get a hold of that" in the Senate.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said in a Bloomberg interview that he hoped to see fewer distractions coming out of the White House.

---

Richard Rubin and Kristina Peterson contributed to this article.

Document AWSJ000020170516ed5h0001f
