World
Philippines Prepares 'Big Battle' to Liberate City Held by Islamic State-Linked Militants; But Manila faces mammoth rebuild and a risk of violence spreading across region

By Jake Maxwell Watts 
959 words
29 August 2017
14:13
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Nearly 100 days since Islamic State-linked militants occupied the southern Philippine city of Marawi, the army says it is planning a final assault to end a battle that took Manila and allied countries by surprise for its stubbornness and violence.

If successful, the operation will allow the tens of thousands of residents who fled to return home. But counterterrorism experts and humanitarian workers say the government faces a mammoth task of rebuilding a devastated city and risks further attacks elsewhere by newly-energized terrorists.

Military Chief of Staff Gen. Eduardo Ano told reporters Monday that the army is preparing "one big battle" to retake Marawi after clearing the city's Grand Mosque and municipal police station last week. He didn't give details.

On Tuesday, reflecting international concern about the spread of violence throughout the region, Australia offered to deploy special forces soldiers to the southern Philippines to provide training and tactical advice. The U.S. already maintains a similar detachment as part of its global counterterrorism operations.

Reclaiming the city of 200,000 has been an uphill battle for the ill-equipped Philippine military, which is unused to urban warfare. Its failure to end the conflict swiftly and the use of destructive airstrikes have alienated the population, many of whom as Muslims feel marginalized in the Roman Catholic-majority country.

Samira Gutoc— former negotiator for peace talks between the government and more-traditional rebel groups, who now serves as a humanitarian worker—aid the extent of the damage, with as much as 90% of the city destroyed, has led some youngsters to call the militants heroes. "We are creating another generation of angry, young, restless, jobless, alienated kids," Ms. Gutoc said.

A coalition of extremist Islamist groups, who for years existed as rival religious or criminal gangs, joined forces to occupy Marawi on May 23, riding on trucks and waving the black Islamic State flag. The military estimates about 40 remain in Marawi and that 600 have been killed. About 130 soldiers and 45 civilians, some of whom were beheaded, have also died.

The Philippine government said the coalition, under the leadership of brothers Abdullah and Omar Maute, sought to declare its intent to establish a caliphate, or Islamic state. The occupation shocked the government and martial law has been declared in the area until year-end. The assault began after a failed attempt by authorities to arrest an allied militant leader. The remaining fighters occupy an area about 500 square meters (5,382 square feet) in size, the military says.

While religious leaders have condemned the militancy, Philippine officials say a small number of residents in Marawi and surrounding areas allied with the militants during the battle, including a former city mayor. Scholars say the Maute family has entrenched itself in the long-restive region, leveraging on old family and tribal loyalties.

Even if the military succeeds in reclaiming Marawi, the aftermath is likely to be just as difficult, analysts say. An unknown number of militants have escaped the city, officials believe. Others have been arrested as they fled. The Maute brothers themselves are unaccounted for. Their father, Cayamora Maute, who backed his sons, died in custody Sunday of medical complications, officials said. They didn't specify a cause of death, but told local media he was suffering from diabetes, hypertension and hepatitis.

"I think what's going to happen is we're going to see some of the fighters disperse into other areas," said Sidney Jones, director of the Jakarta-based Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict. Ms. Jones said she expects to see attacks in other parts of the Philippines, along with the danger that surviving fighters could create a regional training center for aspiring jihadists.

There is also the risk of violence spreading to other parts of Southeast Asia, such as neighboring Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim-majority nation. Several killed in Marawi were foreigners, including Indonesians. The Maute-led group is believed by officials to be in contact with Islamic State leadership in the Middle East, and it appears to have received direct funding, according to the Institute for Policy Analysis of Conflict. Social media has helped the militants promote their cause across borders.

For most of Marawi, future prospects remain bleak. Save The Children, a charity, said this month more than half of the 60,000 children who fled the fighting haven't re-enrolled in school. The military says many residents are unable to return due to improvised explosive devices placed in the city by the militants.

The government has provided temporary accommodation, relief supplies, medical vaccinations and other services to those displaced. Local and national authorities have sought to bring Muslim leaders and law enforcement together to discuss post-battle security and President Rodrigo Duterte's government has sought to accelerate a long-stalled peace process with larger, older rebel groups in the south.

Ms. Gutoc said this week students at a university in Marawi, one of the few institutions to reopen, would fly kites to mark the 100th day since the conflict began. It will be a somber occasion.

"After three months [of conflict] it's really devastating," said Ms. Gutoc, whose own house has been damaged in the conflict. "The frustration is at its highest."

Write to Jake Maxwell Watts at jake.watts@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State-Linked Militants Dump Bodies in Southern Philippines City (May 28, 2017)

* Philippines Struggles to Suppress \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Rebels as Foreign Fighters Found (June 1, 2017)

* Philippines Extends Martial Law in Mindanao (July 22, 2017)

Document WSJO000020170829ed8t001p7
