Lens
Multimedia
Getty Images Grant Winners Announced for 2017

By JAMES ESTRIN 
425 words
8 September 2017
00:01
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

PERPIGNAN, France —hotographers working on personal projects focused on underreported social issues, from poverty in Venezuela to sperm smuggling, received $10,000 each on Thursday from the 2017 Getty Images Grants for Editorial Photography.

Among the winners announced at the Visa Pour l’mage festival in Perpignan, France, are Paula Bronstein, for a project documenting the lives of the victims of wars; Alejandro Cegarra, for an exploration of poverty and conflict in Venezuela; and Barbara Peacock, for a project looking at what happens in bedrooms in the West. Also honored were Alessandro Penso for documenting the exploitation and displacement faced by refugees in Europe, and Antonio Faccilongo for a story about smuggling the sperm of Palestinian prisoners — practice that allows women to conceive children while their husbands serve time in Israeli jails.

Ms. Bronstein has been photographing in Afghanistan since December 2001 and last year published a book on the war’ impact on civilians. While most Western photographers have long lost interest in the country, Ms. Bronstein continues to return as the “umber of civilian casualties keeps going up and up, and it is completely underreported because no one cares.”oo often, she said, media attention flags over time and shifts to newer conflicts. Few outlets, she lamented, will assign photographers, even though civilians continue to suffer.

She will use the grant to expand her coverage of the human toll of the war to Iraq, and the war against ISIS as well as the conflict in Ukraine. Grants, she said, are “ery important, especially if you are passionate about still wanting to tell these stories but not expecting to get an assignment out of it.”

Mr. Cegarra, 27, who was born in Venezuela, has been photographing the political strife and violence in his homeland since 2015, when his work was featured on Lens. With this Getty grant, he plans to focus on “he human cost and consequences of the Venezuelan crisis in the countryside —utside the big cities —nd how the lack of medicines for chronic diseases, the death of the health care system, child malnutrition and the direct impact of the brain drain are affecting families.”

The judges of this year’ contest included Alice Gabriner of Time Magazine, Jean-Françis LeRoy, director of the Visa Pour l’mage festival, Chelsea Matiash of The Intercept, Damon Winter of The New York Times and Thomas Simonetti of the Washington Post.

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020170907ed9700001
