Contests
The Learning Network
Summer Reading Contest, Week 5 | What Interested You Most in The Times This Week? Why?

By KATHERINE SCHULTEN 
794 words
14 July 2017
13:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Week 5 of our Summer Reading Contest, which runs until Aug. 24. What did you read, watch or listen to in The Times this week?

Whatever got your attention, just post a comment here by July 21 at 7 a.m. Eastern and tell us all about it.

We hope you’l click around nytimes.com and find your own great articles, features and multimedia, but we know that not everyone who participates has a Times subscription. Because all links to Times content from our site are free, every week we try to help by posting interesting pieces from a variety of sections.

For example, this week you may have read front-page news articles like ...

Russian Dirt on Clinton? ‘ Love It,’onald Trump Jr. Said

An Iceberg the Size of Delaware Just Broke Away From Antarctica

Military Plane Crashes in Mississippi, Killing at Least 16

Iraq Declares Victory Over \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul

Campus Rape Policies Get a New Look as the Accused Get DeVos’ Ear

Or, maybe you found stories like these from the Style, Sports, International, Magazine, Business, Arts, U.S. and Food sections:

Where Does the Time Go? You Can Find Out, if You Dare

Moon Express Sets Its Sights on Deliveries to the Moon and Beyond

The Original Fake News: Soccer Transfers

Examining the Gulf of Distance Between ‘a’nd ‘aha’

When Just Vanilla Won’ Do, How About a Blueberry Pie Oreo?

Long After Protests, Students Shun the University of Missouri

Shunned During Her Period, Nepali Woman Dies of Snakebite

Baseball’ Story So Far

Where and How to See the Total Eclipse This Summer in the U.S.

Saudi Arabia to Offer Physical Education Classes for Girls

Harvard Panel Suggests Ending a Tradition: Exclusive Clubs

The Pop-Up Employer: Build a Team, Do the Job, Say Goodbye

Girl Scouts Troop Will Expand to 15 Homeless Shelters

How to Throw a Relaxed Parisian Dinner Party

Venus Williams, Defying Age and Skeptics, Reaches Wimbledon Final

How to Stop Breaking Up

Or, maybe you were more into multimedia like ...

Video | Ants Can Build an Eiffel Tower (Sort Of)

Interactive Quiz | If You Fix This, You Fix a Big Piece of the Climate Puzzle

Photos | Start Your Engines:Photography’ Romance with the Car

Photos | The Nebulous Passage Into Womanhood

Infographic and Article | Why Some Men Don’ Work: Video Games Have Gotten Really Good

Video | Studying Sharks, Up Close and Personal

Photos | A Mausoleum for Endangered Species

Photos and Poems | America Today, In Vision and Verse

Or, you might be a fan of the Opinion section, finding pieces like ...

Cliffhangers Are Ruining the Golden Age of TV

Racism Is Everywhere, So Why Not Move South?

My Son, the Jihadist

My Time Is Past. It’ Your Chance Now.

Who Do We Think Of as Poor?

Podcasts for the Recent College Grad

A Conspiracy of Dunces

How We Are Ruining America  and ‘t’ Not the Fault of the Sandwich Shop’ Readers Debate David Brooks’ Column

Whatever caught your eye, tell us about it in the comments.

Need more details? The contest rules are all here, and you can read the work of last year’ winners here. A quick overview, though:

•ou can choose from anything published in the print paper or on NYTimes.com in 2017, including videos, graphics and photographs. (In your response, please include the URL or headline of the piece you pick.)

•e’l post this question each Friday from today through Aug. 18, and you’l have until the next Friday morning to respond with your picks. Then we’l close that post and open a new one with the same question.

•e’l choose at least one favorite answer to feature on our site each week. Winners from this week will be announced on Aug. 1.

•eel free to participate each week, but we allow only one submission per person per week.

•he contest is open to students ages 13 to 19 from anywhere in the world.

_________

While this is the only Student Opinion question we’l be asking this summer, here are 179 questions from this school year, all still open to comment.

Carl Richards | Tim Lahan | Donald Trump Jr. received an email on June 3, 2016, promising dirt on Hillary Clinton. The information was described as being part of Russia's support for his father’ presidential bid. His reply? “ love it.” By Drew Jordan | New research shows how ants band together to survive floods. Find out why these tiny creatures are surprisingly good architects when they all work together. | By JAMES GORMAN and MAE RYAN 

Document NYTFEED020170714ed7e003h1
