World
Suspected Terrorist Attack Injures Five in Canada; Officials identified the suspect as a Somali refugee who was known to police

By Vipal Monga and Paul Vieira 
665 words
2 October 2017
01:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Canadian officials identified the man who stabbed a police officer and drove a van into four pedestrians in a suspected terrorist attack in Edmonton, Alberta, Saturday night as Somali refugee who had been known to police.

At a press conference in Edmonton, Marlin Degrand, an official from the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, said someone had filed a complaint against the suspect in 2015 for "espousing radical ideology." Police officers investigated the complaint and interviewed the suspect, but found no cause to press charges, Mr. Degrand said.

He said initial findings from the investigation suggested the suspect was acting alone.

Edmonton police said that on Saturday night, near the city's Commonwealth Stadium, the unidentified man crashed a white Chevrolet Malibu through traffic barricades and hit a police officer, sending him flying 15 feet through the air. The driver jumped out of the car and began stabbing the officer. The attacker then ran away.

About three hours later, police stopped a man in a U-Haul truck. An officer recognized the name on the license as similar to that of the owner the Chevrolet. The driver fled, leading to a high-speed chase through downtown Edmonton. The driver of the truck hit four pedestrians during the chase, before his van flipped over and he was captured.

Edmonton Police Chief Rod Knecht confirmed during a morning press conference that there was an ISIS flag in the Chevrolet Malibu.

The police officer is expected to recover, he said, during a later update on the situation. The pedestrians' injuries ranged from broken limbs to brain bleeding, said Mr. Knecht. Two of them have left the hospital, while the others remain under observation. He declined to identify them.

In a statement released Sunday, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau said he was "deeply concerned and outraged by the tragedy.""We cannot—nd will not—et violent extremism take root in our communities," Mr. Trudeau said.

The attack comes amid growing concern among some Canadians about a rising wave of refugees and asylum seekers coming into the country.

Canada has processed 27,440 asylum seekers in the first eight months of this year, more than in any of the last entire six years, according to the Canada border and immigration officials.

On Saturday, police closed a Quebec border crossing that had been the site of many refugee crossings, amid a protest from far-right groups and pro-immigrant counter protesters.

In August, anti-immigration protesters in Quebec City clashed with police and counter protesters, a day after about 100 people marched in Vancouver, British Columbia, protesting Islam and the Canadian government's policies on refugees and asylum seekers.

In the past several years, Canada hasn't been immune to terrorist attacks, or cases of Canadians involved in suspected terrorism.

A Montreal man originally from Tunisia was charged in June after a police officer was stabbed at the airport in Flint, Michigan, in what U.S. officials said was a terrorist attack.

Authorities said the attacker yelled "God is great" in Arabic before the officer was stabbed in the neck. Amor Ftouhi faces a charge of committing violence at an international airport, and his case is before the courts in the U.S.

Early in 2017, six Muslim men were shot dead at a mosque in Quebec City during prayer service, an incident Mr. Trudeau called a terrorist act.

In October, 2014, a gunman shot and killed a soldier guarding Canada's National War Memorial in Ottawa before being killed himself inside the country's main parliament building. That came two days after two soldiers were run over in Quebec by another Canadian man whom authorities were investigating for terror links. One of those soldiers later died.

Write to Vipal Monga at vipal.monga@wsj.com and Paul Vieira at paul.vieira@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171001eda1000ul
