World
U.S. Increases Support for New Anti- ISIS  Operation in Syria; Pentagon provides airlift and artillery assistance, adding to advisory mission, but isn't conducting combat operations

By Gordon Lubold in Washington, Noam Raydan in Beirut and Ben Kesling in Washington 
832 words
22 March 2017
23:03
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. forces are providing airlift and artillery support for a newly launched operation in Syria, Pentagon officials said Wednesday, deepening American involvement in the conflict.

The U.S. has increased support for operations in and around the city of Tabqa, which includes the nearby Tabqa Dam, adding to the train-and-advise mission U.S. special operations forces have been providing for many months.

U.S. troops aren't conducting combat operations, a senior U.S. military official said, but operations like this one leave them more exposed to the dangers of combat.

A local antigovernment network said hundreds of U.S. troops and U.S.-backed Syrian fighters were observed arriving in the area, although U.S. military officials declined to say how many Americans are contributing to the mission.

Islamic State fighters have used Tabqa as a headquarters and held hostages there in the past, making the area a significant strategic gain, according to a Pentagon official. Planning for terrorist attacks elsewhere took place in Tabqa, and the area was home to terrorist training camps in the past, the official said.

The dam is also an important power source for northern Syria, home to a significant number of the country's agricultural resources, officials said, making the dam a linchpin for the area both strategically and economically.

"We are taking steps to ensure the integrity of the dam," the official said.

The operation, which began Tuesday, reflects another piece of the plan by U.S. and coalition forces to encircle the city of Raqqa, the de facto capital of Islamic State and the next major target, once control of the Iraqi city of Mosul is wrested from the Sunni extremist group.

The effort to take back Raqqa itself, which Islamic State has held for a number of years, likely won't begin for at least another month or two. Pentagon officials are still deliberating the best approach to take there, including whether to directly support Kurdish fighters.

Arming the Syrian Kurds, known as the YPG, and letting them take part in coming fights in Syria could come with a high political cost from Turkey, whose president, Recep Erdogan, views them a threat and considers them a terrorist group.

"He is adamantly opposed to them [Kurds] being a part of the retaking of Raqqa," said Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, at an event in Washington on Wednesday, adding that if the U.S. empowers the Kurds, "you have enormous challenge as far as relations with Turkey is concerned."

The costs could include access to the Incirlik Air Base in Turkey, which is used by the U.S. to launch operations in both Iraq and Syria and which Mr. Erdogan can use as a bargaining chip in any negotiations.

On Capitol Hill, U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis appeared before a Senate panel and said he would like to see Congress update the Authorization for Use of Military Force, the law that allows operations in Syria and Iraq. He advocated for a renewed authorization with no time limit and no geographical limit on confronting groups like Islamic State.

The move in Syria came as international officials met in Washington to review their anti-Islamic State strategy. The U.S. is moving to increase the tempo of the fight, including through new authority for ground commanders and possibly additional troops. There now are about 5,000 U.S. service members in Iraq and about 500 in Syria.

Separately, Syrian opposition monitoring groups said Wednesday that coalition airstrikes struck a school sheltering homeless Syrians near Raqqa, killing at least 33 people.

The airstrike Monday represented a "new massacre committed by the U.S.-led coalition," said the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights. It didn't detail its claim.

The U.S.-led coalition said that it had "no indication" that its aircraft hit civilians near Raqqa on Monday, adding that a civilian casualty team would investigate the claim.

Last week, the Pentagon denied claims that U.S. manned aircraft and drones killed civilians in a strike targeting al Qaeda operatives near Aleppo.

Some 116 civilians have been killed in coalition airstrikes since March 8, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said, as the air campaign in support of U.S.-backed Kurdish rebels seeking to cut off Raqqa intensifies and President Donald Trump allows more aggressive strikes in Syria.

Tamer El-Ghobashy in Erbil, Iraq, contributed to his article.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com and Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* \b ISIS\b0 -Safe Zones Planned

* Egypt President to Visit Trump in April

* Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Coalition Accused of Airstrike on Civilian Shelter in Syria

Document WSJO000020170322ed3m005eh

