CFO Network (A Special Report) --- What Worries John McCain the Most: The Arizona senator says it's North Korea in the short term and Russia in the long term; Also: thoughts on China, Syria

By Gerald F. Seib 
1,265 words
19 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
R4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

In an interview with Sen. John McCain published in Monday's CFO Network report, Mr. McCain in response to a question about Syria recounted a time that President Barack Obama told him: "I'm going to degrade Bashar al-Assad, I'm going to upgrade the Free Syrian Army, and we're going to have a change in treatment." Mr. McCain mistakenly said the conversation was with President Donald Trump.

(WSJ June 21, 2017)

(END)

National security is front and center in people's minds right now -- from the continuing fight with ISIS to dealing with provocative moves by Russia. The Wall Street Journal's executive Washington editor, Gerald F. Seib, spoke with John McCain, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee. Here are edited excerpts of their discussion.

MR. SEIB: What world problem keeps you awake at night more than any other these days?

SEN. MCCAIN: Probably in the short term, North Korea because of the progress they're making on nuclear weapons. And in the long term, Russia. Everybody talks about ISIS. We all know how terrible ISIS is. We know that ISIS is killing people as we speak. They're very dangerous, and they're going to continue to kill people for a long time, but they don't have a nuclear weapon and they don't have a means to deliver it.

Vladimir Putin's behavior is more and more aggressive and provocative, whether it be in the conventional weapons as far as continued aggression in Ukraine to the cyberattacks throughout the region. The guy is hellbent on returning the Russian Empire. And that's what he wants to do.

MR. SEIB: China, friend or foe, has been a question that's puzzled people for the last three decades. Where are we on the China friend-or-foe continuum right now?

SEN. MCCAIN: We have to understand the Chinese want to control the Western Pacific. Lee Kuan Yew, one of the wisest persons I've ever met in my life, told me, "The Chinese want the West China Sea." They believe that the last 200 years were accidents of history, and it's their historic role to be the predominant power in the Asia-Pacific region.

That does not mean that China is ready to risk a war. It doesn't mean that they are ready to have a conflict with the United States of America, but they do believe that that part of the world is a historic Chinese area of control.

I also believe that they have the strongest leader that they've had since Deng Xiaoping. I think we're going to have to, at some point, exercise what we've been to war over a couple of times, and that's freedom of navigation. If we don't respect freedom of navigation of the high seas, then we are going to have problems in a lot of other places besides the Pacific.

MR. SEIB: What's the view of the Trump administration in Asia? And what's the view of the Trump administration in Europe among allies right now? What did you find?

SEN. MCCAIN: Uncertainty. They see him say one thing, and then they see him do another, and then they see him say another thing and then do another.

MR. SEIB: If there's a global trade war it's probably going to start in Asia, where you just were. How acute is the fear of a trade war there?

SEN. MCCAIN: If there's ever anything that describes beauty in the eye of the beholder, it is certainly trade. History shows that one of several factors in the strongest economy of the last 70 years was the new world order established in 1947. That new world order is under stress and pressure that it has not been in 70 years. And so when our secretary of commerce says, "All we want is a level playing field," I've heard that song before.

MR. SEIB: There was a suggestion made yesterday that the White House would just dismiss Bob Mueller, the newly appointed special counsel to look into the questions of the Trump administration's ties to Russia. What would your advice be if that suggestion came up?

SEN. MCCAIN: I can't believe they would think of such a thing. Look, there are a lot of people in Washington, around this country, that have tarnished reputations, and there's some question about Mueller? Come on. I think it would be as explosive as anything I can think any single act that the president might take.

MR. SEIB: So if you get to the core issue here, it basically was what were the Russians trying to do, A), and B), was there a collusion between the Russian agents and the Trump campaign? What are your answers to those two questions?

SEN. MCCAIN: I don't know. I don't know. And I think that's the reason why we need these hearings, and that's why I've always said we need a select committee. I've been saying it for weeks, because I've seen this movie before as the scandal unfolds, and another shoe drops. We're going to have to have a complete investigation. For me to draw a conclusion when we haven't got all the evidence I think would be prejudging. But I think there's enough out there that we should have a select committee of people who are highly regarded, who will work together in a bipartisan fashion. This thing spills over into all different aspects of American security.

The Russians have literally tried to play in all aspects of American life. If you can destroy a free and fair election, you destroy democracy.

MR. SEIB: There's one area we haven't talked about: how the Syrian mess gets resolved. What's your advice? What do you want to see happen in Syria?

SEN. MCCAIN: I'd like to see us do what President Trump told me and Lindsey Graham after Bashar al-Assad crossed the red line. He said, "I'm going to degrade Bashar al-Assad, I'm going to upgrade the Free Syrian Army, and we're going to have a change in treatment." Lindsey and I go out, drive away, "Hey, we're with the president."

About 10 days later I'm sitting in my office and CNN says, "Oh, the president has decided that he's going to go to Congress for permission before he acts." Whoops. I wasn't the only one who was surprised. The Saudis had planes on the runway, ready to attack. They found out the same way that I did. We need to replace Bashar al-Assad. That's how they found out, by watching CNN.

One of the reasons why President Trump was so well received in that part of the world, one was because he's not Barack Obama, and two, because he never mentioned human rights.

If we abandon our advocacy for human rights, we're no different than any other nation that rises and falls throughout history. And we've already seen the reaction of some of these countries to President Trump's lack of mention of human rights by seeing increasing crackdowns on human-rights activists. There's no mention of it whatsoever. Human rights is not the fundamental principle; American self-interest is our fundamental principle.

When we abandon that position on human rights, then you start seeing the crackdowns, and the people thrown in jail, and the increase in tension. And it doesn't work. You can't change human beings. They want freedom. They want human rights, and they look to us as the role model and our inspiration.