US
Trump Feels 'Hamstrung' in Ability to Work With Moscow, Adviser Says; McMaster says president told Russians he wants to move beyond "all of the Russia news" to address issues such as the fight against  ISIS 

By William Mauldin 
504 words
21 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump is limited in his ability to cooperate with Moscow because of investigations of possible connections between Russia and his 2016 campaign, a top adviser said.

Mr. Trump wants to confront Russia over its actions in Ukraine and Syria and cooperate with the country to fight against Islamic State, White House national security adviser H.R. McMaster said Sunday morning on ABC.

Mr. Trump met with Russian diplomats in the White House not long after dismissing James Comey as director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which was probing Russian interactions with the president's campaign officials. The New York Times reported Friday that Mr. Trump had told Russian officials during the meeting that his firing of Mr. Comey had relieved pressure on him related to Russia.

Mr. McMaster said Sunday the Oval Office meeting was an opportunity for the leaders to discuss challenges in the two countries' working relationship.

"The gist of the conversation was that the president feels as if he is hamstrung in his ability to work with Russia to find areas of cooperation because this has been obviously so much in the news," Mr. McMaster said. "The intent of that conversation was to say what I'd like to do is move beyond all of the Russia news so that we can find areas of cooperation."

Democrats and other political critics have attacked Mr. Trump for continuing to seek close engagement in Moscow as officials are investigating Russian interference in the 2016 campaign.

"We need to be clear that we don't have aligned interests with Russia," Sen. Ben Sasse (R., Neb.) said on ABC.

Mr. Trump has denied any campaign collaboration with Moscow and dismissed reports as "fake news."

"What the president was trying to convey to the Russians is, look, I'm not going to be distracted by this, all these issues that are here at home," Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said on Fox News. Mr. Trump doesn't want to "distract from our efforts to see if we can engage with you, engage with Russia, and identify areas where we might be able to work together," he said.

Sen. Marco Rubio (R., Fla.), who ran against Mr. Trump in the 2016 Republican primaries, said he would wait for conclusions of the intelligence committee he serves on before weighing in on reports about the Russian diplomatic conversations and Mr. Comey. "I do not want to undermine the credibility of this effort in one direction or another," Mr. Rubio said Sunday on CNN.

Still, if the president were attempting to interfere with FBI and impede then investigation then it would be "potential obstruction of justice that people have to make a decision on," Mr. Rubio said.

Write to William Mauldin at william.mauldin@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170521ed5l0012x
