World News: Russia Warns U.S. as Risks Rise in Syria --- Threat to track U.S. planes comes after American pilot shot down Syria regime jet

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Thomas Grove in Moscow 
683 words
20 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Tensions between Washington and Moscow escalated on Monday when Russia threatened to track American warplanes in Syria after a U.S. pilot shot down a Syrian jet for the first time in the country's six-year war.

The U.S. military responded to Moscow's warnings by shifting the flight routes of some pilots carrying out missions in Syria, U.S. officials said, an effort to minimize risks to American pilots as the White House and the Pentagon both appealed for calm.

Sunday's U.S. downing of the Syrian regime warplane came as American forces are increasingly at risk of direct confrontation with Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his allies from Russia and Iran.

The U.S. military has stepped up its operations in Syria as the American-led coalition tries to push Islamic State from its stronghold in Raqqa. Over the past month, U.S. forces have shot down an Iranian-made drone that targeted coalition forces in southern Syria and carried out three airstrikes on Iranian-backed fighters. The U.S. targeted the Syrian jet on Sunday after it carried out an airstrike on American-backed forces near Raqqa in northern Syria.

Tehran has also stepped up its military actions in Syria by launching cruise missiles at Islamic State fighters in eastern Syria and sending one of its top military commanders to pray on the front lines with Iranian-backed fighters, a move seen by some U.S. officials as a deliberate taunt aimed a Washington.

On Monday, Moscow said it would treat U.S. and coalition aircraft flying west of the Euphrates River in Syria as "targets" that could be tracked by air defense systems or Russian pilots. But Russia stopped short of threatening to shoot them down, giving some U.S. officials hope that the situation won't worsen.

"I think the worst thing any of us could do right now is address this thing with hyperbole," Gen. Joe Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Monday in Washington. "The only actions that we have taken against pro-regime forces have been in self-defense -- and we've communicated that clearly."

As a practical matter, U.S. officials said, the Russian threat could have only a limited impact, since much of the American military focus right now is on driving Islamic State out of Raqqa, which is on the eastern side of the Euphrates.

The new standoff with Russia comes amid a swirling debate within the Trump administration over its Middle East strategy. While key military officials, including Gen. Dunford, want to focus on defeating Islamic State, other administration officials are pushing for a more aggressive confrontation with Mr. Assad and his Iranian allies.

At the White House, spokesman Sean Spicer said the U.S. wanted to avoid further clashes with Mr. Assad and his allies.

"The escalation of hostilities among all of the factions that are operating there doesn't help anybody," he said. "While we want to de-escalate the situation there . . . we will always preserve the right of self-defense."

The increasingly congested battlefield is raising fears that the U.S. could be drawn more deeply into the Syrian war. Under former President Barack Obama, the U.S. sought to avoid direct confrontations with the Assad regime while it focused on defeating Islamic State.

President Donald Trump has embraced a more aggressive approach in Syria by sending in more U.S. forces to work side-by-side with the Syrian Democratic Forces and other American-backed fighters battling Islamic State, also known as ISIS.

While the U.S. has stepped up direct military action against Syrian government forces in recent weeks, the Russian government has pushed a narrative that Washington is hampering its efforts to target Islamic State.

---

Aresu Eqbali and Rebecca Ballhaus contributed to this article.