EDITORIAL
Editorial Desk; SECTA
Mr. Erdogan Does Not Get His Way

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
614 words
19 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
28
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

President Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey came to Washington for his first meeting with President Trump with hopes of achieving a ''turning point'' in an alliance that is vitally important to both sides, but has been profoundly strained by policy issues involving efforts to defeat ISIS in Syria. His demands were mostly unreasonable, which means continued tensions.

The enduring image of Mr. Erdogan's visit will not be the pomp at the White House but that of his security guards and other supporters beating up protesters outside the Turkish ambassador's residence. The police described the attack as ''brutal'' and the State Department called it an intolerable assault on free speech. Eleven people were injured, including a police officer, and nine were taken to the hospital. Some Republican lawmakers said Turkey should apologize.

The Turkish Embassy blamed the demonstrators for ''aggressively provoking Turkish-American citizens who had peacefully assembled to greet'' Mr. Erdogan. Washington's Metropolitan Police will now have to determine accountability. That could be tricky; Mr. Erdogan and his security people are back in Turkey. Mr. Trump, meanwhile, has shown a shocking indifference to Mr. Erdogan's authoritarian crackdown on his own people, which in turn makes it even more important to show that the United States will follow the rule of law.

As for policy issues, Mr. Erdogan demanded, among other things, that the United States abandon the Syrian Kurds, whom he views as terrorists. But Mr. Trump had already approved a plan to arm Syrian Kurds so that they can help in the campaign to take Raqqa, the capital of ISIS' self-declared caliphate. Mr. Erdogan considers the Syrian Kurds to be indistinguishable from the Kurdistan Workers' Party or P.K.K., a separatist group fighting his government in Turkey. For their part, American military commanders have long argued that the Kurds are among the most skilled fighters in the region and must be part of the ground force if Raqqa is to be recaptured anytime soon.

Mr. Erdogan may have thought he could sweet-talk the mercurial Mr. Trump into changing this policy; indeed, some senior American officials feared that this could happen, given Mr. Trump's fondness for strongmen and the suspicious ties of his former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, to Turkey. But Mr. Trump correctly stuck with his decision to reinforce the Syrian Kurds.

The Syrian Kurds have already carved out a Kurdish zone in Syria along Turkey's southern border; Turkey fears that their enlarged role in the battle for Raqqa could enable them to extend the zone and funnel arms to the P.K.K. To mitigate Turkish concerns, the Pentagon has recruited more local Arabs, who could make up 80 percent of the ground force of 50,000 or so troops that will seek to retake Raqqa.

Mr. Erdogan also hoped he could persuade the administration to extradite Fethullah Gulen, a cleric living in exile in Pennsylvania who Turkey believes was the mastermind behind an aborted coup last July. The administration appears not to have given in to this demand. There is a strict judicial process that must be followed before such a decision is made, and so far, Turkey has not provided the evidence needed to support an extradition claim, officials say.

Reflecting its unhappiness with the visit, Turkey called for Brett McGurk, the American coordinator for the anti-ISIS coalition, to be replaced (the State Department says he will remain), and threatened to strike back ''without asking anyone'' if it comes under attack by the Syrian Kurds. The hoped-for ''turning point'' seems a long way away.

Document NYTF000020170519ed5j0004z
