World News: World Watch

393 words
14 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ZAMBIA

Prosecutors Plan

To Ease Political Crisis

Zambian prosecutors plan to drop treason charges against jailed opposition leader Hakainde Hichilema, two officials familiar with the decision said, a step that would ease the political crisis that has been roiling one of Africa's most stable democracies.

Mr. Hichilema, who had been charged with allegedly trying to overthrow the government, was set to go on trial on Monday. But two officials said prosecutors had decided to drop the charges to facilitate talks between Mr. Hichilema and President Edgar Lungu.

Mr. Hichilemawas arrested in April, after a convoy of his supporters allegedly disrupted Mr. Lungu's motorcade. Police said at the time the incident posed a risk to the president's life.

Martha Mushipe, a lawyer for Mr. Hichilema, said his legal team hadn't been informed of any decision to drop the charges. A government spokesman declined to comment.

Mr. Hichilema narrowly lost last year's presidential election to Mr. Lungu and has insisted the vote was rigged.

-- Nicholas Bariyo and Gabriele Steinhauser

---

INDIA

Children's Deaths at

Hospital Spark Probe

The deaths of 64 children at a state hospital in Gorakhpurin the northern state of Uttar Pradesh last week have triggered outrage and a debate about the condition of the stretched health-care system.

The state government said that there were issues with procuring oxygen at the hospital, Baba Raghav Das Medical College, last week, but that it didn't cause the deaths. Parents told local media they were asked to use hand air pumps to help their children breathe amid a shortage of ventilators, staff and oxygen.

Uttar Pradesh Chief Minister Yogi Adityanath visited the hospital Sunday and said a committee of health officials from the state and central governments would investigate the deaths.

-- Corinne Abrams

---

IRAQ

ISIS Says It Attacked

Troops Near Karbala

Islamic State claimed responsibility for an attack on Iraqi troops outside Karbala that left one dead, according to a statement from the group.

The claimed suicide car bomb attack late Saturday struck a checkpoint outside Karbala and injured two others, said Iraqi Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool, spokesman for the Joint Military Command.

Karbala, some 55 miles south of Baghdad, is home to the Imam Hussein Shrine, one of the holiest sites in Shiite Islam.

-- Associated Press

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170814ed8e00029
