World; Asia Pacific
20 Are Hacked and Beaten to Death at Pakistani Shrine

By SALMAN MASOOD 
976 words
2 April 2017
18:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

ISLAMABAD, Pakistan —he men and women arrived late on Saturday at a Sufi shrine in a village in central Pakistan. Followers of a self-described mystic, the pilgrims were accustomed to rituals in which they received spiritual guidance and sometimes removed their clothes to be cleansed of their sins.

Instead, the Pakistani police said on Sunday, they were given an intoxicating drink and then beaten with batons and hacked with knives, leaving 20 of them dead and four others injured.

After the massacre, the police said they had arrested the shrine’ custodian, Abdul Waheed, 50. Mr. Waheed, the authorities said, admitted luring the devotees to the site about 12 miles from Sargodha in Punjab Province, and carrying out the killings with the help of at least two associates.

An injured woman who managed to escape the attack ran and reported it to the authorities, officials said. The victims’odies, which had been stripped of clothing, bore the marks of torture, the police said.

“ixteen men and four women were found murdered,”aid Liaqut Ali Chatta, a senior district official.

The motive for the killings was not immediately clear, but officials said they were investigating whether it had to do with control of the shrine. Information about possible criminal charges was not immediately available.

Mr. Waheed told the authorities that he had killed the devotees at the shrine to Ali Muhammad Gujjar, the self-described mystic, in self-defense because he believed they planned to poison him.

Mr. Waheed also said that Mr. Gujjar, a relatively obscure mystic who died two years ago, had been poisoned by a group of devotees. Mr. Gujjar’ followers turned his grave into the shrine where the massacre occurred.

The devotees were Muslims of the Barelvi sect, who generally revere shrines and follow the teachings of people they deem to be saints and mystics. In rural areas, poor devotees seek not only spiritual guidance, but also cures for diseases, in rituals performed by mystics and shrine custodians.

Mr. Waheed, a former government employee who used to give sermons at the shrine, claims to be the spiritual heir to Mr. Gujjar. The rituals he performed were said to cure diseases and cleanse devotees of sin.

Those practices included beating devotees with batons after asking them to remove their clothes. Mr. Waheed would set the clothes on fire during the rituals, officials said.

One of those killed was Asif Ali Gujjar, Mr. Gujjar’ son, and police officials said the killings may have been related to disagreements over control of the shrine.

“here are reports that the accused had an issue with Asif over the custody of the shrine,”r. Chatta, the senior district official, said. “ocals say that Asif claimed he is the rightful heir of the shrine, being the son of Ali Muhammad Gujjar.”

Officials said that the people who went to the shrine Saturday night were given an intoxicating drink before they were tortured, raising the possibility that the killings were premeditated.

Malik Ahmed Khan, a spokesman for the provincial Punjab government, said there had been no previous complaints about the shrine or the practices there.

“nly after this incident, people from the surrounding area told police that they used to hear screams coming from the shrine”r. Khan said. “ocals said that the devotees were beaten as part of a ritual,”e added. “he shrine was always crowded by drug addicts and people who were under the influence.”

The chief minister of Punjab Province, Shahbaz Sharif, has ordered an inquiry into the killings and has announced that the families of those who were killed would be compensated, according to Salman Sufi, an aide to the chief minister.

“he practices at shrines include money donations, jewelry and gifts in return of a pat of blessing from the custodians,”r. Sufi said. “ome guardians are appointed after an inner power struggle no less than those on the lines of Cosa Nostra,”e added, referring to the Sicilian Mafia.

He said that the custodians of many shrines cultivated relationships with prominent local political figures to increase their influence and, in return for votes, receive protection.

“here have been cases in which unknowns are granted the status of sainthood and their burial places declared shrines, merely for the purpose of donation collection,”r. Sufi said. “arge sums of money are then collected and used on food, clothing, processions and, when an illicit custodian is involved, on drugs, women and alcohol.”

He called for proper regulations to be put in place to control shrine custodians in the country.

Daniyal Hassan contributed reporting from Lahore, Pakistan.

Correction: April 2, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated who had ordered an inquiry into the killings at the shrine. It was Shahbaz Sharif, chief minister of Punjab, not Salman Sufi, an aide to the chief minister.

* Pakistan Shrine Bombing Kills Scores in Worst Attack in Months

* Bombing at Sufi Shrine in Pakistan Kills Dozens

* \b ISIS\b0  Hates Our Saint Because He Belongs to Everyone

Pakistani police investigators on Sunday surveying the area near a Sufi shrine on the outskirts of Sargodha, Pakistan, where 20 people were hacked and beaten to death and four were injured. | Reuters.. | Rescue workers and security officials gathered on Sunday around the bodies of people killed at a shrine in Sargodha, Pakistan. | Israrul Haq/European Pressphoto Agency | Relatives of the victims waited for information. At least 20 disciples, including four women, were hacked or beaten to death. | Israrul Haq/European Pressphoto Agency | The Sufi shrine where at least 20 people were killed with batons and knives in Punjab Province in Pakistan. | Fatiq Bukhari/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170402ed42001up
