World News: Iraqi Forces Move to Retake Western Mosul --- Civilians urged to flee as ground offensive advances against Islamic State

By Ben Kesling and Ali A. Nabhan in Kirkuk, Iraq and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad   
625 words
20 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved   

Iraqi security forces launched a ground offensive early Sunday to retake the western side of Mosul from Islamic State, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said, breaking a weekslong stall in the battle for the city.

The fight for areas of Mosul west of the Tigris river began with a push toward its main airport and is being led by federal police forces, with Iraq's army and militias also involved in the effort, Iraqi military officials said. Hours before the operation began, Iraqi air forces dropped millions of leaflets on the west side of the city urging civilians to flee.

"It's your last chance to drop weapons, to quit Daesh, since Daesh is a stranger in our country and our moderate religion," they read, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

"A new dawn has emerged, the dawn of the big victory," Mr. Abadi said, appearing on state television from Baghdad just after sunrise to announce the operation.

By midmorning, Iraqi military officials said they had retaken the first village on the push north to the airport.

Mosul is Iraq's second-largest city and Islamic State's major remaining stronghold in the country.

Iraq's military and allied forces first launched their offensive to wrest Mosul back in October, quickly pushing into its outer eastern neighborhoods before getting bogged down in street fighting with entrenched militants.

Operations against the extremists stalled after Iraqi security forces suffered substantial casualties. Five bridges spanning the Tigris were also damaged or destroyed by fighting, leaving the forces no way to cross over to west Mosul and continue the operation.

Iraq's military and U.S.-trained special forces units have battled Islamic State with the help of U.S.-led coalition air support and advisers, including special operations forces, on the ground.

"Mosul would be a tough fight for any army in the world, and the Iraqi forces have risen to the challenge," said Lt. Gen. Stephen Townsend, the top American commander in Iraq, after the operation's relaunch. "They have taken the fight to the enemy and sacrificed their blood for the people of Iraq and the rest of the world."

U.S. forces are playing the same supporting role they played in east Mosul, U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said Sunday in Abu Dhabi.

"We will continue with the accelerated effort to destroy ISIS," he said, using an acronym for Islamic State.

At any point in the past few days there have been as many as 50 aircraft over Mosul, U.S. military officials said, striking Islamic State headquarters buildings and police stations, among other targets.

But the fight on the west side of the city could prove an even greater military and political challenge.

The western neighborhood of Old Mosul, with dense warrens of narrow streets, will likely be the scene of guerrilla-style fighting. The urban warfare could be especially deadly for regular Iraqi army troops, who don't have the same training and equipment as the special forces.

The U.S. military operating over Mosul is finding it harder to conduct airstrikes due to the density of buildings and people, the U.S. military officers said. The military is required to have few if any civilian casualties.

The city's western outskirts are also now surrounded by Iraqi forces, leaving Islamic State fighters no escape route and giving them few options but to dig in for a long fight.

---

Gordon Lubold in Abu Dhabi contributed to this article

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170220ed2k0001j
