Op-Ed Columnist
Opinion
Why the G-20 Matters

By DAVID LEONHARDT 
578 words
7 July 2017
15:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

This article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive more briefings and a guide to the section daily in your inbox.

Even if you’e not paying much attention to this week’ Group of 20 summit, it’ a good reminder of the major themes in geopolitics right now. And those themes are worth some attention. They include:

Renewed U.S.-Russia rivalry. When President Trump and Vladimir Putin meet today at the G-20, Putin will have a major advantage: a clear vision of what he wants, compared with Trump’ vague desire “o come home with something,”s Slate’ Fred Kaplan writes.

In The Washington Post, former C.I.A. deputy director Michael Morell and former National Security Council staff member Samantha Vinograd, write a mock pre-meeting briefing to Putin from his advisers. “ussia is in its strongest position since the end of the Cold War; the United States, our great adversary, is the weakest it has been,”he memo states. “ur policies are working. We need only to keep going.”

China, emboldened. The chaotic foreign policy of the Trump administration has given Beijing an opening to play more of a global leadership role. As Stratfor explained: “he Chinese president will attend the event having recently returned from state visits to Russia and Germany showcasing China’ role as a champion of free trade and global cooperation when the United States is emphasizing its national interests.”

But shadowing China —nd almost everything else —t the summit is North Korea.

U.S.-Europe tensions. In Poland yesterday, Trump spoke about “he West” in terms straight out of the alt-right playbook. “uch rhetoric is meant to conjure blood-and-soil nationalism,”wrote The New Republic’ Jeet Heer, “efining the West not based on ideals like democracy and liberty, but atavistic loyalties to territory and shared kinship.”

In doing so, Trump cast his lot with the European political opponents of Emmanuel Macron and Angela Merkel, including some prominent Poles. “oland’ defense minister, Antoni Macierewicz, said that his government is on the same page as Trump when it comes to being attacked by ‘iberals, postcommunists, lefties and genderists,’”s Masha Lipman writes in The New Yorker.

Finally, a bit of news about The Times’ Opinion report:

We have a new team that will be creating opinion videos —risk pieces with a strong point of view (not to be confused with our short-documentary unit, Op-Docs). As Adam B. Ellick, the team’ executive producer, explains, “he department will produce its own Opinion video, but will also provide a video op-ed platform by collaborating with and curating outside voices, from experts to do-it-yourself vloggers to comedians.”

The team published its first video op-ed yesterday, “ombs Will Not Defeat \b ISIS\b0  (but Maybe the Internet Will).” In it, Abdalaziz Alhamza, a Syrian activist, tells of risking his life to expose the horror of life under ISIS.

Also, we’e still hiring to complete the video team.

You can join me on Twitter (@DLeonhardt) and Facebook. I am also writing a daily email newsletter and invite you to subscribe.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion).

Leaders at the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, after posing for a group photograph. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170707ed77003pd
