The Good Fight
Arts; Television
‘he Good Fight’eason 1, Episode 3: Who Voted for Trump?

By ANGELICA JADE BASTIÉ 
1,011 words
28 February 2017
02:03
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Season 1, Episode 3

In 1921, Greenwood, Okla., a suburb of Tulsa that was home to a thriving and prosperous black community, was burned to the ground by a white mob. The community, colloquially referred to as “lack Wall Street, represented a legacy that black people are still trying to rebuild. It is estimated that as many as 300 black people were killed and more than 8,000 were left homeless. But what’ most profound was the silence that followed. It was only in 2012 that this brutal event began to be taught in Tulsa’ public schools. Its lack of historical prominence carries a lesson many black people in America learn in one way or another —egacies are important and can easily be rewritten by outside forces.

In this week’ episode of “he Good Fight,”oseman suggests that Barbara’ insistence on putting Lucca on Diane’ case is simply a power play. But Barbara’ sly insults indicate her fear and speak to something far more complex. Her machinations speak to a desire to cement the legacy of the firm that bears her name so it won’ come undone like many black institutions —ike Greenwood —ave throughout American history. The presence of Maia, Marissa and Diane disrupt the image of the company, a historically all-black law firm in a overwhelmingly segregated city. Nothing explosive happens, but there is enough tension to suggest that the polite smiles will only last for so long.

The show shares more than a little DNA with “he Good Wife.”howrunners Robert and Michelle King continue to show an interest in the ways technology affects modern life. Here, Diane’ client, Dr. Picot (Zachary Knighton), is arrested after guiding a dentist in Syria to perform open-heart surgery over video chat. The opening is expertly constructed, utilizing silence and a fine eye for details like Jax’ (Tom McGowan) bare feet to place us firmly in Maia’ perspective.

Dr. Picot’ arrest on conspiracy for aiding a man suspected of terrorism introduces several moral quagmires ripe for exploration. Did Dr. Picot really know that the man on the operating table in Syria was suspected of being a terrorist? And if he did, what does that mean in terms of his responsibilities as a health care professional? The case ends up being an elaborate ruse. It isn’ the man on the operating table that is linked to ISIS, but rather his brother, whom the government wanted to draw out of hiding. The ending, in which everyone in the makeshift Syria hospital is killed, ultimately makes this story a lesson in futility. The case lacks the emotional pull and moral complexity it deserves. But it does introduce a fascinating new character, Assistant United States Attorney Colin Morello (Justin Bartha).

Colin and Lucca obviously share some history, the particulars of which remain hinted at but never explained. There is an intimacy that comes across in every witty barb and flirtatious glance they cast at each other. Their dynamic helps the main story line rise above its relative flatness. Unfortunately, the rest of the episode doesn’ have anything to distract from the racial quandaries it ignores.

Barbara and Boseman are in the tricky position of potentially losing a client because of the shifting political climate created by the presidency of Donald J. Trump. If they lose a bid with a telephone company they’e represented for years, it would put the firm in dire financial straits. The two lawyers scramble to find one person in their firm who voted for Trump in order to curry favor during the bid. Julian Cain (Michael Boatman) proves to be the only lawyer willing to acknowledge that he voted for Trump. This sets up a fascinating thread about black politics, liberal identity and what the firm represents.

Unfortunately it goes nowhere. Writer Tegan Shohet brings no nuance to a politically fraught episode. Julian’ newly discovered conservatism alienates him from his colleagues even though he triumphantly wins the bid for the firm. The meaningful glances and whispers from the other lawyers hint at the profound discomfort that differing politics can inject into relationships. But that’ as far as the story goes in delving into the ways that Julian’ voting record may upset the culture of this proudly liberal firm, which repeatedly represents victims in police brutality cases.

A series with a majority black cast that is willing to explore power plays, identity and the current political climate has some rich material to work with going forward. “he Good Fight”ouched on the idea of legacies among women in the premiere, when Diane effectively passed a torch to Maia. But it is the legacy that Barbara seeks to ensure, weighted by a thorny American history full of events like the Greenwood race riots, that has the most potential. After three episodes, the series has yet to prove that it is capable of meaningfully developing that material.

Other Gossip

•aia mostly exists in the margins as she successfully gets a list that Henry requested from Jax’ computer. Maia provides flashes of humor and suspense as she outwits Jax. But for the most part this narrative is all setup, no reward.

•“hat’ the real truth about your dad,”ax tells Maia. “e didn’ want to steal people’ money. He just wanted to be seen as a winner.”t’ a pronouncement she obviously doesn’ take to heart. The problem with Maia is that she still sees the world split neatly into heroes and villains.

• like the newly introduced investigator at the firm, Jay (Nyambi Nyambi). He seems sly and curious in a way that makes him immediately stand out. That Diane unknowingly thanks Marissa for the work Jay did in finding a witness suggests that the tension at the firm shows no signs of lessening.

Christine Baranski in “he Good Fight.” Patrick Harbron/CBS 

Document NYTFEED020170228ed2s000gp
