World News: World Watch

621 words
15 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

IRAQ

ISIS Raid in South

Leaves Dozens Dead

Islamic State gunmen stormed a restaurant in southern Iraq after blowing up a car bomb outside, killing more than 50 people, Iraqi officials said, including Iranian pilgrims having a meal.

The attack, along a highway near the southern city of Nassiriya, was one of the deadliest in the country in recent months. The Sunni Muslim extremist group claimed the assault via its official Amaq news agency, saying it had killed dozens of Shiite Muslims, whom it brands as apostates.

A bomb exploded in the restaurant parking area, an interior ministry official said. Gunmen disguised as members of Iraq's mainly Shiite Muslim paramilitary forces then got out of a second vehicle and entered the building, opening fire on diners, the official said. A second vehicle then blew up.

At least 16 of the victims were Iranians who had stopped for a rest on their way to visit Shiite shrines in southern Iraq, an interior ministry official said, and another 85 people were wounded.

-- Ghassan Adnan, Ali A. Nabhan and Isabel Coles

---

MALAYSIA

Blaze Kills at Least 23

At Boarding School

A predawn fire tore through an Islamic boarding school in the Malaysian capital, killing at least 23 people, mostly students trapped in their bedrooms, officials said.

Initial investigations showed the small, all-boys school was operating without a fire-safety permit, though it had applied for one, fire authorities said. The school started operating three years ago.

The fire left 21 of the school's 36 students dead, along with two of its six teachers, officials said. Students of the school were between 13 and 17 years old. The blaze was the deadliest to hit this Southeast Asian country in many years, fire officials said.

Kuala Lumpur Police Chief Amar Singh said there was no reason to suspect arson.

-- Yantoultra Ngui

---

CHINA

Business Activity

Slowed in August

China posted a surprise slowdown in business activity in August, a sign that rising borrowing costs and property restrictions are having a more severe effect on the economy than expected.

The rise in value-added industrial output, a rough proxy for economic growth, slowed for a second straight month, climbing 6% in August, compared with a 6.4% increase in July, the National Bureau of Statistics said. The increase came in lower than the median forecast of 6.6% growth from a poll of economists.

In a potentially even more ominous sign, growth in investments was the slowest in almost 18 years.

Officials blamed August's slowdown on bad weather but economists say a clampdown on credit, a cooling property market and waning effects from previous stimulus measures may have damped domestic demand.

-- Liyan Qi and Grace Zhu

---

UNITED KINGDOM

Officials Open Inquiry

On London Fire

The U.K. opened an inquiry into the Grenfell Tower fire that killed at least 80 people, with its chairman pledging to provide answers to how a tragedy of its scale could happen in modern-day London.

Martin Moore-Bick, a retired judge appointed by the government to head the inquiry, said he recognized the anger and betrayal felt by survivors, many of whom lost everything in the June fire in the 24-story low-income apartment block in West London.

The scale of the inquiry highlights the difficulties for the government in deciding how and whether to hold people and corporations to account. The first phase will cover how the fire began and spread and the second will look at how the building design may have exposed it to serious risk.

A focus will be on the flammable exterior cladding that is suspected of contributing.

-- Jenny Gross

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170914ed9f0001q

Magazine
An Exclusive Tour of a French Iconoclast's Moroccan Getaway; In a corner of Marrakech's medina, Bernard-Henri Léy has restored and expanded the Palais de la Zahia— place to retreat to with his wife, Arielle Dombasle, while communing with the riad's storied past

By Sarah Medford 
2,945 words
12 September 2017
11:58
WSJ. The Magazine from The Wall Street Journal
WSJM
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The French film Day and Night seemed to have a lot going for it on the eve of its release in February 1997. The romantic drama, which co-starred Alain Delon and Arielle Dombasle (with Lauren Bacall in a minor role), had been bankrolled by French luxury-goods magnate Françis Pinault and his friend Andrééy, an industrialist who was also the father of its director, the celebrated writer Bernard-Henri Léy. But the critical response was immediate—nd brutal. The chastened director and his leading lady, who was also his wife, escaped to Delon's holiday home in Morocco, tucked away in the medina of Marrakech. They swam in its palm-shaded pool and took sun on the crenelated roof terrace, which overlooks the Koutoubia Mosque and most of the ancient pink-walled city.

"We came supposedly for one week, and after the week I told him, 'I don't want to move! I'll buy it,' " Léy says of the house. Delon demurred, according to Léy, but not for long. "A new lady in his life— Pol Pot of the feelings—as making things difficult for him. And finally, he said, 'Why not? I'll sell.' "

Léy and Dombasle acquired the Palais de la Zahia, as it is known, in 1998. Over the past two decades, they've expanded the centuries-old riad with additional guest rooms, public and private areas for sheltering from the day's heat and gardens that alternately delineate and obscure its meandering courtyards. From the start, they've worked on the project with their friend Louis Benech, France's preeminent landscape designer.

The historic palace has remained a hushed, bewitching getaway from the couple's home in Paris. Léy, in particular, has taken a keen interest in the characters who have passed through its doors, including the feudal warlord Thami el Glaoui, diplomat Hubert Lyautey—he first French resident-general in Morocco—nd the Swiss writer-adventurer Isabelle Eberhardt.

In 1966, Palais de la Zahia took a dip into the counterculture when John Paul Getty Jr. purchased it as a wedding present for his second wife, the Dutch model Talitha Pol. Getty's father, J. Paul Getty Sr., was listed that year in The Guinness Book of World Records as the world's richest private citizen for his holdings in the oil company he'd co-founded, and soon a rivulet of Senior's cash was making its way into a full restoration of the palace. Leading the work was Bill Willis, a Memphis-born antiques dealer and self-taught decorator who'd already cut a swath with the younger Gettys through Morocco. The couple's hedonistic days and nights at La Zahia were summed up in a now-famous image taken by Patrick Lichfield for Vogue in 1969, in which Talitha, dressed in an embroidered djellaba, harem pants and white go-go boots, lounges before Paul on the darkening roof terrace. (Two years later she died of a heroin overdose in their Rome apartment, after which Getty sold the Marrakech house.)

Léy finds the flamboyant and somewhat debauched history of La Zahia intriguing. Trailing the Gettys to its door was a creative coven that included Yves Saint Laurent and Pierre Bergé Marianne Faithfull, Gore Vidal and Michelangelo Antonioni, among others. "My passion is really the memoirs," he says. "The house was documented as the only place on earth where the Beatles met the Rolling Stones. They spent a Christmas here together. A few nights, with their ladies." The episode was recorded by Fabrice Gaignault in his 2006 book, Sixties Muses; Léy mentions that he also corroborated it with his houseman, Mohsine, who was born at La Zahia and whose late father looked after it before him.

Mohsine has just delivered a tray bearing espresso in porcelain cups to the terrace, where Léy is relaxing after his morning swim, dressed in an aloe-green bath towel and wraparound sunglasses. He regrets not meeting Paul Getty in person, he says. "One of his sons came back here one day, with great emotion, and wanted to make a sort of pilgrimage. I think he was happy with how we've kept it, I don't know."

The French couple bring their own version of celebrity to La Zahia. Dombasle, after several decades as an actress, has segued into a career as a singer and occasional film director. (Her latest, the 2013 Opium, was inspired by Jean Cocteau's classic memoir.) Wasp-waisted and vivacious, Dombasle is the shimmering sun to Léy's taciturn moon. He's a writer-adventurer in the spirit of Eberhardt, hitting the road in dusty, perilous landscapes in search of a story, and is best known as an outspoken public intellectual, a self-described humanist who has taken controversial stands on matters of international policy—ost recently in Bosnia, Libya and across the Middle East.

Now 68, Léy came onto the French scene in the 1970s, first as a war correspondent for the left-wing newspaper Combat and then as the author of Barbarism With a Human Face, an impassioned repudiation of Marxism. A fortune accrued by his father in the timber business has allowed him to lead a comfortable life, and he pursues projects only as they interest him. The list is long: Léy has produced so much—nd had so many professional ups and downs—hat they are beyond count. His 2006 book American Vertigo, subtitled Traveling America in the Footsteps of Tocqueville, was a bestseller in the U.S. as well as France despite an incendiary review by Garrison Keillor in the New York Times that began, "Any American with a big urge to write a book explaining France to the French should read this book first, to get a sense of the hazards involved." Alternately celebrated and lampooned in the French press for his high-minded exploits (he's regularly entarté or given a pie in the face), Léy has been rebranded in France simply as "BHL." He is also a dandy and a well-documented ladies' man: If BHL had his own emoji, it would sport a black suit and a white Charvet shirt with a stand-up collar, open at the neck.

In Marrakech, Léy works to the exclusion of almost everything else. "I never move from here," he says, glancing around the densely shaded courtyard. "I work all day. And all evening. Sometimes I'm alone, and sometimes it's a good way to get work done." He admits that he leaves a lot of the details surrounding La Zahia to Dombasle.

"My wife likes making a house," Léy says. "What I like in a house is people. The history. My history—nd the people who came before. This is a little bit of a haunted house."

Palais de la Zahia is unquestionably a big house, a grand riad that dates to the 16th or the 18th century, depending on whom you ask. Thought to have been built by the Glaoui, or ruling pashas, of Marrakech, it bears all the markings of a rich man's trophy: rooms faced in zellige (glittering, richly patterned mosaic tile); cedar-wood ceilings, almost Nordic in their intricate floral motifs, carved and painted with botanical dyes; deep, arched fireplaces and walls of tadelakt (glazed and pigmented plaster). At some point, a smaller riad was annexed to the larger one and used as a harem. As Mohsine explains, this is where Marlon Brando spent a few months shacked up with the Gettys in the late '60s.

The first time Léy and Dombasle returned to La Zahia as its owners, they brought along Benech and his then-partner, Christian Louboutin, to consult on various home improvements. "As a person, I like Louis's tenderness," Léy says. "And as a professional, I love that he believes plants are living creatures. He really communicates with plants. They are the partners of his life."

Léy has soaked up a bit of this thinking himself. "Louis taught me that plants had a life," he says. "And strangely enough, he convinced me of my relation to this world. The Americans love their dogs and their cats. For me, perhaps it's pet plants. Introduced by Louis Benech. 'Mr. Léy, meet your pet plant.' "

Benech got his start among the rain-misted gardens of Normandy, but several early projects had introduced him to North Africa's parched, unremitting climate, and the challenges of garden making there fueled his imagination. "The landscape tradition in Morocco is a bit Alhambresque," he says from the terrace of his Paris home and office, a modest townhouse in the ninth arrondissement. "There is sometimes a big reservoir surrounded by fruit trees—itrus or olive, as in the Agdal Gardens of Marrakech. And then there is the riad garden, an interior courtyard with raised walkways and sunken beds. It's a gravitational watering system—hough not as clever as the ones in Iran."

In the early '80s, Benech designed a slim water canal in the Moorish style at Dar Zuylen, the estate of Guy and Marie-Héèe de Rothschild in the Palmerie, a new residential community outside the medina. "It was lined with artichokes, which have such a beautiful leaf," he says. Having stayed at the house one summer, Léy and Dombasle craved a canal of their own. Beyond that, their requests for La Zahia were personal: Dombasle wanted a certain apricot rose, a hybrid tea named Just Joey; her husband wanted the world in microcosm.

"My little idea," Léy explains, "was that in this house, you should be able to experiment with all sorts of relationships between shadow and light. There should be a place for sunlight, for deep shadow, for coolness and for burning heat. A place for being surrounded by plants and then seeing plants at a distance. Not a variety of plants, but a variety of behaviors of me and my friends. I wanted the framework to be set in order to create a variety of relationships with plants."

Benech says he doesn't recall this dialectical tale, but the result was achieved anyway—n its beguiling complexity, La Zahia offered a range of horticultural opportunities. The existing trees in the riad's courtyard garden were magnificent: jacarandas, figs, palms, flame trees and Persian silk trees approaching the height of the upper-story bedrooms. At eye level, though, the sunken beds looked empty and rather sad. Léy and Dombasle suggested raising the soil to the level of the green-tiled walkways, but Benech argued that this would "strangle" the trees. Instead, he persuaded them to plant a proper understory mixed with potted ferns and flowering climbers—osy pink bougainvillea, persimmon-hued crossvine—hat would soon infiltrate the courtyard with a primitive jungle on the order of Henri Rousseau. "At the time of the Gettys, there were just the big trees," Léy says. "Now there is a sort of clever and wild composition, and it is like this all year round."

Barefoot and still draped in a towel, Léy rises from a velvet-cushioned campaign chair and pads through an arched doorway in the courtyard to an area he annexed some years after buying the house. The transition is from night to day: A sun-struck garden in fiery oranges and yellows encircles a newly built wing. Here Benech planted citrus trees and fragrant, trailing moonflower, wisteria and jasmine vines to make an opulent stage for the hybrid tea roses Dombasle favors, which are laced among hibiscus and an almost-vermillion lantana to ensure that the garden is constantly in color. Flowing down the middle is a turquoise-tiled canal that culminates in a small pool where calla lilies, bird of paradise and other showy bloomers perform.

"Although it looks wild, it's very geometric," Dombasle says of the rectangular plot. "Louis makes very sophisticated gardens that never look like gardens àa françise. It's not his style at all. But he's so passionate."

Renowned for his encyclopedic knowledge of plants, Benech prefers using native species whenever possible. In Marrakech, frustrated by the poor selection of natives in the nurseries, he resorted at one point to smuggling in seeds and seedlings from abroad, a practice that soon took on a narcotic allure. He supplemented his stowaways with local specimen plants scavenged one by one. "Louis was like a collector who knows that a piece of art exists somewhere, and he has to find it," Léy says. "He would take a car to the desert and come back with a little pot. Now the plants are not so little. It was a big commitment, and he did it with heart."

The same could be said for Léy's expansion of the illustrious riad. "This is a little more than a house, so there is a transmission that has to be true and consistent, a legacy," he explains. "I did not change it. I added. And I got in touch with Bill Willis, because I wanted the same spirit as the Gettys. But Bill worked in close contact with Louis."

Willis had stayed on in Marrakech after restoring Palais de la Zahia in the '60s, becoming the city's unlikely shaman of the decorative arts. "Bill created the Marrakech look, and it started with that house," says the decorator Jacques Grange, who visited La Zahia with Yves Saint Laurent in 1972. "Yves was very close friends with Talitha. She had died by then, but we spent time there with Paul."

In 2002, Willis reprised his role at La Zahia. Then in his 60s and somewhat of a recluse, the designer threw out one far-fetched idea after the next, and Benech—ith input from Louboutin, who is no slouch when it comes to houses—id what he could to shape them into workable plans. Willis died in 2009, and Léy and Dombasle emerged from the adventure with a few choice stories. They still use the furniture Willis designed for the Gettys, including a four-poster bed painted like the Good Ship Lollipop in a fantasia of ice cream colors and Berber-inspired motifs. In Talitha Getty's former boudoir, Dombasle stirred Willis's haute-bohemian pot by placing a red-satin chaise once owned by the Italian fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli beside a soaking tub paved with psychedelic zellige tiles. "It's so amusing," Dombasle says of the result, taking a drag on her cigarette and smiling.

Certain rooms at La Zahia still breathe the stately air of the 19th century. When the couple host late dinners for friends, a long table in one of the salons is set with colored votive candles, and the fireplace is lit on cool evenings. Léy says he prefers to dine at home. "In 20 years, I never went to a dinner, a party, to a lunch here." This sounds unbelievable, but he insists. "People come from abroad," he says. "A coterie, no. But it's a place where my best friends come. And sometimes the house has been used to have people meet, and take time together discreetly." Meaning? "A few political discussions have taken place here," he says cryptically. "In 2000, there were some meetings, some talks here. Between Israelis and Palestinians. In 2011, there were some talks with Libya, factions of the Libyan revolution. But generally, it is not that. Generally, it is really a place for me to write and to get together with my friends."

The Middle East has been Léy's focus for more than a decade, and in the past two years he's made a pair of documentaries on the rise of ISIS. "As you can guess, you don't come back from such an adventure absolutely intact," he says of filming in northern Iraq. "It takes time, and I am…n recovery." To ease back into the general public discourse, he's working on a new book about populism, he says. "Trump, Putin, Europe. How to understand it, how to get rid of it."

Reconciling the many contrasts of Léy's life is no easy matter, a fact that becomes even clearer after a trip to La Zahia's basement, where a series of rooms is lined with images of him and a galaxy of acquaintances from childhood to the present.

Cameos by everyone from his two children, his two ex-wives, Omar Sharif, Nicolas Sarkozy and Charlie Rose to camo-clad soldiers and Russian dissidents tell an unfathomable number of stories. Benech refers to the place as "the Dombaslothèue"—here the still-glamorous chanteuse lets loose in the evenings to entertain friends. "This is a crazy place," Léy says, before leading the way through to the underground gym.

In 2000, on a trip to Tangier, Léy fell in love with the view from a clifftop bluff and asked the late French designer André Putman to build him a contemporary villa there. The two Moroccan houses couldn't be more different, he says—Like Mac and PC. Like Beatles and Rolling Stones. Like Racine and Corneille." In July, though, he put the pristine Tangier house on the market; he rarely found himself going there. Instead, he's been spending more time in the ancient arms of La Zahia. He can be alone here, to a point. "This is a very old house, with many ghosts. Good ghosts."

Document WSJM000020170912ed9c00001
