
World
U.S. Is Caught Between Ally Turkey and Kurdish Partner in Syria; American forces take steps to avert attack by Ankara on militia aiding  ISIS  fight

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
957 words
4 May 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

It's rare for American forces in the Middle East to fly the Stars and Stripes from their armored vehicles. Usually they try to blend in, with special-operations troops often going as far as donning local uniforms.

But now, part of the U.S. mission in northern Syria is to literally show the American flag. The goal is to forestall attacks by America's NATO ally Turkey on America's key partner in the fight against Islamic State, the main Syrian Kurdish militia known as YPG.

In an unusual alignment, Russia is also flying its flag, with small, highly visible units deployed in the Syrian Kurdish enclave of Afrin. Russia and the Syrian regime have increasingly collaborated with the YPG and—ike the U.S.—ublicized recent deployments, aiming to deter Turkey.

This surreal standoff shows just how much the six-year Syrian war has upended the region's alliances. It is also an illustration of the extent to which America's focus on defeating Islamic State has come at the expense of its broader relationship with Turkey, an economic powerhouse of 80 million people that has NATO's second-largest army and exerts influence across the region.

Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, his authority bolstered by a controversial referendum last month, is now on a mission to persuade the world's powers that Turkish interests can't be ignored—nd that whatever the Syrian Kurds may deliver isn't worth a rupture with Ankara.

He visited President Vladimir Putin in Russia this week and is heading for a meeting with President Donald Trump in Washington in mid-May. The main aim is to scuttle American plans for YPG-led forces to seize Islamic State's main remaining stronghold of Raqqa, a city that is overwhelmingly Arab.

That won't be an easy sell.

"The American military really likes working with YPG. They feel there is no alternative to take Raqqa and they feel they have to take Raqqa sooner rather than later," said Robert Ford, a former U.S. ambassador to Syria and a scholar at the Middle East Institute. "I don't think this administration has ever been convinced that the Turks have a viable alternative plan or alternative force. This is going to be a difficult time with Erdogan."

U.S. forces were scrambled to the Syrian-Turkish border last week, moving in high-profile convoys that flew large American flags after Turkish airstrikes killed dozens of YPG fighters in Syria. Mr. Erdogan has since threatened to mount a cross-border operation into YPG-held territory and said he was "saddened" by public U.S. support for the group.

Turkey considers the YPG and its political parent PYD just a front for the PKK, or the Kurdistan Workers' Party— group which seeks to split off Kurdish areas within Turkey itself and is classified as terrorist by Ankara and Washington. Turkey last week simultaneously launched airstrikes against the YPG in Syria and targeted PKK bases in northern Iraq.

Aydin Selcen, a security analyst who served as Turkey's consul-general in the Kurdistan region of northern Iraq and as a senior diplomat in Washington, said Mr. Erdogan is deliberately escalating in Syria and Iraq to gain leverage with Mr. Trump ahead of the trip.

"Mr. Erdogan wished to prove to the U.S. and the coalition that when and if Ankara is convinced of a national-security threat emanating from Syria or Iraq, it is ready to take unilateral action to protect its interests," Mr. Selcen said. "The airstrikes in his thinking will allow him to negotiate with both the U.S. and the Russian Federation leaders from a position of strength."

Turkey and its Syrian allies also hope to woo Mr. Trump by highlighting what they say is the risk that the Kurdish group—hich has a long history of ties with Tehran—ould become Iran's Trojan horse in the region.

"The most influential partner of the PYD are the Iranians, not the Americans," said Safwan Akkash, a senior leader of the moderate Syrian opposition, which is backed by Turkey and Saudi Arabia. "We know that the Kurds are ready to cooperate with any party that will support their cause."

The U.S. government, while acknowledging the links between PKK and YPG, has long argued that the two organizations are different. The State Department expressed deep concern over last week's Turkish airstrikes which hit what it described as America's "partner forces" in Syria.

So far, the YPG in Syria—nlike the PKK in Iraq—asn't launched significant cross-border operations into Turkey, in part because of American and Russian involvement.

"The Americans know that there is no threat to Turkey from YPG areas, so no one is convinced by the Turkish argument," said Mutlu Civiroglu, a Kurdish analyst who follows the YPG.

Turkish concerns aren't entirely without merit, however. Ankara views the establishment of a PKK-affiliated entity along its southern border as an "existential threat," said James Jeffrey, a former U.S. ambassador to Turkey and to Iraq who is currently a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

"What the Turks fear is that the Americans have agreed to give the PYD a statelet in all of northern Syria" in exchange for securing Raqqa, Mr. Jeffrey said. "That would allow the PKK to outflank Turkey, so that what was just an insurgency in a part of southeast Turkey could become a civil war."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170504ed540015p
