Foreign Desk; SECTA
Islamic State Is Criticized As Persecutor In U.S. Report

By GARDINER HARRIS 
662 words
16 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration criticized the Islamic State on Tuesday for its persecution of religious minorities but made no mention of a recent rise in attacks against Muslims in the United States, as it released the government's annual accounting of religious persecution around the world.

''As we make progress in defeating ISIS and denying them their caliphate, their terrorist members have and continue to target multiple religions and ethnic groups for rape, kidnapping, enslavement and even death,'' said Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, referring to the Islamic State, in brief remarks Tuesday morning at the State Department.

He went on to declare that the Islamic State was ''clearly responsible for genocide against Yazidis, Christians and Shia Muslims in areas it controls or has controlled.'' The comments were part of the formal release of the International Religious Freedom Report for 2016, an annual accounting required by Congress of threats to religious freedom around the world.

''Religious persecution and intolerance remains far too prevalent,'' he said. ''Almost 80 percent of the global population live with restrictions on or hostilities to limit their freedom of religion.''

Missing from Tuesday's report was any mention of a spike in acts of violence and bigotry against Muslims in the United States, widely reported in the wake of last year's election. Nor did the report take note of President Trump's proposal as a candidate to ban the entry of all Muslims into the United States, or his subsequent orders to bar the entry of refugees or citizens from seven (later reduced to six) predominantly Muslim countries.

The report listed threats to religious freedom in 199 countries, but the United States was not on the list.

''We do not rate ourselves,'' said Ambassador Michael Kozak of the State Department's Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor. In a press briefing after Mr. Tillerson spoke, he added, ''I would put our record on religious freedom up against anybody in the world.''

The report recognized that the resettlement of refugees suffering religious persecution was ''a vital tool'' but failed to acknowledge that the Trump administration had severely restricted the entry of all refugees into the United States.

''Every year, unfortunately, there are way, way more refugees than any country can take,'' Mr. Kozak said when asked about the seeming incongruity.

Threats against Christians abroad have been a focus of concern for conservatives in the United States, and in May Mr. Trump released a statement denouncing the ''merciless slaughter'' of Christians in Egypt.

In his remarks, Mr. Tillerson noted that the Islamic State had ''claimed responsibility for attacks on Christian pilgrims and churches in Egypt.''

''The protection of these groups and others subject to violent extremism is a human rights priority for the Trump administration,'' he said.

Mr. Tillerson then cited a host of other countries for religious intolerance, including Saudi Arabia, Turkey, Bahrain and Pakistan. He castigated China for persecution of Uighurs, a Muslim minority.

The report noted some improvements, including a change in law in Vietnam to speed recognition of religious minorities and efforts by Oman and the United Arab Emirates to allow the construction of churches. And Mr. Tillerson hailed the nomination of Gov. Sam Brownback of Kansas to serve as the State Department's envoy of religious freedom.

Little in the report released Tuesday was surprising. Divided by country, the report includes a lengthy compendium of publicized instances of religious violence and persecution. But this routine homework of the State Department is mandated by Congress and often followed closely by nongovernment organizations.

Mr. Tillerson's decision in March to skip the traditional personal announcement of an annual human rights report, led to widespread condemnation. Mr. Tillerson has appeared less comfortable with the public diplomacy part of his job. Both Mr. Trump and Vice President Mike Pence have said that the protection of religious freedom is a priority.

Document NYTF000020170816ed8g0003y
