theater
Two Protesters Disrupt ‘ulius Caesar’n Central Park

By MICHAEL PAULSON 
826 words
17 June 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

A production of “Julius Caesar”n Central Park was disrupted on Friday evening by two protesters who objected to the bloody scene in which the title character, played by an actor costumed and styled to resemble President Trump, is knifed to death.

A woman who later identified herself on social media as Laura Loomer jumped onto the stage just after the assassination of Caesar and began shouting, “top the normalization of political violence against the right,”nd, “his is violence against Donald Trump.”s. Loomer describes herself as a “ right-wing investigative journalist and activist”ho has previously worked with James O’eefe, the conservative activist known for selectively edited undercover video investigations.

At JULIS CAESAR, during assassination, woman runs on stage saying, "Stop the normalization of violence against the right." Escorted out. —oward Sherman (@HESherman) June 17, 2017

Ms. Loomer’ interruption of the scene was being recorded by a man in the audience who began shouting, “ou are all Goebbels,” reference to the Hitler aide and Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels. On social media, Jack Posobiec, an activist who supports President Trump and has been associated with conspiracy theories, identified himself as Ms. Loomer’ collaborator.

The show was paused briefly, with the actors still on stage, as security officers removed the two protesters from the Delacorte Theater, the 1,800-seat outdoor amphitheater in which Shakespeare in the Park is staged. The audience tried to shout down the protesters, and applauded as they were removed.

Two thuggish Twitter trolls disrupted Julius Caesar tonight. They were escorted out. News that the show would resume got a standing ovation. —ark Harris (@MarkHarrisNYC) June 17, 2017

The show then resumed as a stage manager announced, “ick up at ‘iberty and freedom,’”eferring to the lines in the play that came next.

“wo protesters disrupted our show tonight; we stopped the show for less than a minute and our stage manager handled it beautifully,”Oskar Eustis, the artistic director of the Public Theater and the director of the “ulius Caesar”roduction, said in a statement. “he staff removed the protesters peacefully, and the show resumed with the line ‘iberty! Freedom!’he audience rose to their feet to thank the actors, and we joyfully continued. Free speech for all, but let’ not stop the show.”

Ms. Loomer, 24, continued to shout from outside the theater after she was removed, and declined requests by the police to step away from the structure; she was then arrested. The New York Police Department said she was charged with criminal trespass and disorderly conduct and was released.

Ms. Loomer, who outside the theater had shouted, “ou guys are just as bad as ISIS”nd, “ecause of liberal violence like this, a congressman this week was shot in Virginia,”osted a video of her own behavior on Twitter.

Julia Caesar meets Laura Loomer https://t.co/THlerwmODp —aura Loomer (@LauraLoomer) June 17, 2017

The assassination of Caesar is part of the script of the play, which was written 418 years ago by William Shakespeare; the choice to depict the title character as akin to President Trump is part of a long history of productions of the play that have used the text to explore contemporary politics. In 2012, another American production of “ulius Caesar”epicted the title character as President Barack Obama.

The decision by the Public Theater, which oversees Shakespeare in the Park, to depict Caesar as Mr. Trump has prompted social media protests from conservatives, and two corporate sponsors of the theater program, Delta Air Lines and Bank of America, withdrew their support. A third sponsor, American Express, as well as the National Endowment for the Arts, took steps to make sure the public knew they had not supported the production.

Defenders of the Public Theater, saying the play does not sanction political violence but is instead a cautionary tale about the use of antidemocratic means to defend a democracy, have said the critics are misconstruing the play and this production.

Two critics of the production demonstrated outside the Delacorte on Friday night, while a slightly larger group of defenders held a counter-demonstration.

Anti @PublicTheaterNY demonstrators at Trumpish "Julius Caesar" outnumbered by pro @PublicTheaterNY counter-demonstrators pic.twitter.com/0ehfVu4jUl —ichael Cooper (@coopnytimes) June 16, 2017

On Thursday, defenders of the production held a rally at Astor Place.

Friday night was the first time the play, which began performances May 23 and ends on Sunday, had been disrupted by protesters.

Michael Cooper and Scott Heller contributed reporting.

* Oskar Eustis on Trump, ‘ulius Caesar’nd the Politics of Theater

* How Outrage Built Over a Shakespearean Depiction of Trump

* Why ‘ulius Caesar’peaks to Politics Today. With or Without Trump.

* Et Tu, Delta? Shakespeare in the Park Sponsors Withdraw From Trump-Like ‘ulius Caesar’

* Review: Can Trump Survive in Caesar’ Palace?

Document INHT000020170619ed6h000bo
