World
Islamic State Drones Terrorize Iraqi Forces as Mosul Battle Rages; Militant group uses increasingly sophisticated drone technology to target troops, civilians

By Ben Kesling in Mosul, Iraq, and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad 
1,157 words
26 February 2017
23:11
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As they advance into Islamic State's remaining urban stronghold of west Mosul, Iraqi forces are struggling to counter the terror caused by the militant group's drones.

Iraqi forces have grown accustomed to enemy drones flying over the battlefield since Islamic State seized swaths of the country in 2014. They have used rifle fire and high-tech gadgets to counter them, and even have drones of their own.

But the militants have fine-tuned their drone technology. What were once improvised, remote-controlled aircraft resembling model planes are now commercially available quadcopters—rones with four helicopter-like blades—hat have been retrofitted to carry grenades that can be dropped over targets.

Islamic State's increased drone usage comes as army officials said Sunday they had retaken their first neighborhood west of the Tigris River, raising the Iraqi flag there. The battle for the west is the final step in the offensive to drive the militant group from Iraq's second-largest city.

The military last week seized the northern city's sprawling international airport, giving it a foothold in Mosul's densely packed western neighborhoods. Over the weekend, troops pushed deeper into those areas, led by special-forces units. The army also said it had seized control of Mosul's main power station.

Islamic State drones have regularly flown over west Mosul during the fight, sending troops running for cover.

Though the U.S.-led coalition in Iraq says Islamic State's increased drone capability won't have a major impact on the state of the battle for Mosul, it allows the group to target civilians and aid workers in east Mosul, giving Islamic State the ability to terrorize people no longer living under its rule and hampering the area's return to normal life.

"The drone issue is worrying," said Iraqi military spokesman Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool. "There is no technical way to [entirely] stop these drones."

While the strikes don't always hit their targets with precision, militants are perfecting their technique.

"There are so many videos and images of bombs being dropped with a surprising degree of accuracy that I believe there are skilled operators who can hit with a consistent degree of accuracy," said Nick Waters, an analyst at research firm Bellingcat, which focuses on open-source information, much of it from social media.

Islamic State typically loads its drones with conventional grenades that detonate on impact, dropping them by remote control as they hover over a target, according to a report this month from Bellingcat.

They often affix plastic tail fins to the grenade to increase its stability and accuracy, the report said. Some bombs employ munitions that Islamic State manufactures itself.

The bombs can be dropped with accuracy from a height of up to 1,000 feet, Bellingcat estimated. Such strikes have also been used by militants to create diversions during suicide attacks, it added.

To counter the drones, Iraq's army is using high-tech gadgets that can target them using radio waves. But devices available to the military are scarce. Troops are often forced to resort to shooting at the small, nearly noiseless drones with rifles.

At least one remote base near Mosul last fall, U.S. Army sentries manned their posts armed with machine guns and a device called DroneDefender manufactured by Ohio-based research-and-development outfit Battelle Memorial Institute. The U.S. military is supporting Iraqi forces from the air and ground in the fight against Islamic State.

DroneDefenders are rifle-shaped and feature thick antennas that when pointed at drones can scramble GPS or remote-control units up to a quarter of a mile away, causing the drones to fall.

A spokeswoman for Battelle said it had sold more than 100 units to the U.S. Departments of Defense and Homeland Security.

"We have the DroneDefender and it works," said Lt. Col. Arkan Fadhil of the elite Iraqi special forces. He said few were available to Iraqi forces, without elaborating why.

Iraqi and American defense officials said Iraqi forces have such technology but declined to give further details, citing security concerns.

Exporting battlefield supplies from the U.S. to certain countries, like Iraq, requires special licenses.

Devices that emit radio frequencies can be subject to international regulations and red tape.

The Battelle spokeswoman said an export control license is required to ship products to foreign governments, but it doesn't have such a license to export to Iraq. She said the company has recently seen increased interest in the device around the world.

Last week, the U.S. Air Force announced a $15 million contract with ELTA North America Inc., a subsidiary of Israel Aerospace Industries, for 21 counter-drone systems to be delivered in the next few months.

Further details weren't available. The Defense Department didn't respond to request for comment. An ELTA spokeswoman said the company doesn't discuss specific clients. But it recently touted a counter-drone system made expressly to down quadcopter-type machines.

At least one Popular Mobilization Unit, a militia allied with Iraq's army, says it has received counter-drone technology from the Iranian Revolutionary Guards.

Iran backs a number of Iraq's Shiite Muslim militias and recently developed numerous anti-drone technologies, including a drone-jamming antenna unveiled in December, according to semiofficial Iranian news agencies. Iranian officials haven't said whether these technologies are in use in Iraq.

"Either we get such tactical weapons directly from the Islamic Republic or we make them locally here, but in consultation with our brothers in revolutionary guards," said Jaffar al-Hussaini, spokesman of Hezbollah Battalions, a large militia operating west of Mosul.

Iraqi forces have also been using their own commercial drones for reconnaissance and to help identify Islamic State fighters posing as civilians.

On a recent day in west Mosul, Lt. Col. Fadhil was at an aid station near the front, his foot bandaged after being struck by a drone grenade.

"It's annoying, with someone always tossing a grenade on you," he said.

Meanwhile, in the east, citizens freed from Islamic State occupation now fear their drones. Near the ruins of Mosul University, Mohammed Yasin worked at a falafel stand.

"Every two to three days there's a drone attack," he said, and the army recently stationed a machine gun on the street to fire at the next one.

Aid groups have said drones make it nearly impossible to set up distribution stations as they are easily targeted.

Asa Fitch, Awadh Altaie and Majd Helobi contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* Iraq Takes the Fight Against \b ISIS\b0  to Syria

* Dozens Killed in Syria Car Bombing

* Iraqi Forces Close to Controlling Mosul Airport

Document WSJO000020170225ed2p0018h
