Health
Influential Health Fund Reboots Its Search for a Leader

By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr. 
485 words
28 February 2017
18:16
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria announced Monday that it would reopen its search for a new executive director.

The fund is influential in global health, disbursing about $5 billion a year to fight the three diseases — budget more than twice as large as the World Health Organization’.

The fund’ board had expected to conclude the search for a replacement for the current executive director, Dr. Mark Dybul, this week at its annual retreat. But “ue to issues encountered in the recruitment process,”oard members were unable to finish, the fund said in a statement.

The selection process was conducted out of the public eye by a recruiting firm hired by the board’ nominating committee. On Feb. 15, The New York Times reported that the committee had named three finalists: Helen Clark, a former New Zealand prime minister; Dr. Muhammad Ali Pate, a former Nigerian health minister; and Subhanu Saxena, a former pharmaceutical executive.

Dr. Pate, who was widely praised for his fight against polio in Nigeria, had a history of sharing articles on his Twitter feed that were highly unflattering to President Trump. One carried a headline referring to him as “ fascist of some variety” another said he had “ore in common with ISIS than America.”

The United States contributes a third of the Global Fund’ budget, and some observers said they thought Dr. Pate’ selection might hurt efforts to attract donations. Ms. Clark, frustrated with the process, withdrew from consideration.

On Feb. 20, leaders of the “mplementers group”n the fund’ board, representing countries and nonprofit organizations that receive money from the fund, expressed “rave concerns”bout the process because “ey facts”bout candidates were missed, according to a letter to the board chairman, Norbert Hauser, obtained by The Times.

A majority of the implementers, the letter said, wanted the board to reopen the process, appoint a new nominating committee, hire a new recruitment agency, announce the names of candidates, hold a session at which the public could question them, and hold a town hall-style meeting at which staff members could air their views.

“ublic events would offer candidates a chance to show their ability to manage and respond to questions and would re-emphasize the Fund’ commitment to transparency,”he letter read.

According to the rules of the process, no candidate can win without a two-thirds vote of the implementers group, along with two-thirds of the board’ “onor group.”o delay appeared inevitable.

The letter by the implementers group also requested that the board create a transition committee, appoint an interim director, and manage the handover from Dr. Dybul, who is stepping down in May when his contract ends.

It also asked that any senior management changes or restructuring be delayed.

Document NYTFEED020170228ed2s006bt
