World News: Syrians Caught as Fight Heats Up

By Raja Abdulrahim 
599 words
14 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

According to the monitoring group Deir Ezzour24, about 100 civilians are stuck in the Syrian city of Mayadeen, where airstrikes are seeking to drive out Islamic State. A World News article on Saturday about civilian casualties in Syria incorrectly said 100,000 civilians remain in Mayadeen.

(WSJ October 16, 2017)

(END)

Civilian casualties have surged in the frenzied battles to drive Islamic State from its stronghold in the oil-rich Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, where U.S.-led forces and the Russian-backed regime are conducting separate campaigns against the extremists, according to activists and human-rights groups.

As both sides race to make territorial gains in Deir Ezzour, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations and activists have called for greater measures to protect civilians caught in the middle of the fighting there and elsewhere.

"While we all recognize that the fighting against ISIL is important, we need to remember that the civilians cannot be punished twice," U.N. Special Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura told the U.N. Security Council late last month, using an acronym for Islamic State.

More than 231 civilian deaths have been documented in Deir Ezzour province since Sept. 28, said Omar Abu Leila, who heads the monitoring group Deir Ezzour24, which opposes both Islamic State and the regime of Bashar al-Assad.

With Islamic State clinging to a fast-shrinking swath of territory in Syria, the battlefield against the terror group has become more congested. On Thursday, the regime, backed by Russian airstrikes, said it was advancing deeper into the western neighborhoods of the strategic city of Mayadeen in Deir Ezzour.

Islamic State has ushered its leadership and most valued equipment into Mayadeen as it has been routed from other areas. The city sits near Syria's most important oil fields, which Islamic State controls and uses to fund operations.

With so much strategic importance, the militants are expected to put up a stiff fight for Mayadeen. Deir Ezzour24 estimates there are about 100,000 civilians still stuck in the city and living under intense airstrikes. About 20 people were killed on Oct. 6 in Russian airstrikes on the outskirts of Mayadeen and their bodies haven't yet been retrieved because of the bombardment, Mr. Abu Leila said.

The Russian military Tuesday confirmed that heavy aerial bombardment was continuing in the Deir Ezzour region.

Russia consistently denies targeting civilians, and often criticizes monitoring groups for being Western propagandists or militant sympathizers.

Since the battles against Islamic State kicked off in Deir Ezzour last month, thousands of civilians have fled the fighting. Western diplomats say the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State was caught off-guard by how quickly the regime advanced and rushed to start its own offensive there.

"The biggest danger for civilians is from above," said Sarmad al-Jilani, an activist with Sound and Picture, a group documenting human-rights violations in eastern Syria. "The Russian and Syrian planes are carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance for the regime army. And the coalition is carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance" of their allied ground forces.

The Syrian regime has consistently denied that its warplanes target civilians.

The U.S.-led coalition said there has been no change to its rules of engagement in Deir Ezzour, despite the accelerated battle plan there. It said it takes every practical measure into consideration to ensure that civilians aren't harmed.

"The battlespace in and around [Deir Ezzour] is complex and congested, with multiple actors operating onc both sides of the Euphrates River to defeat our common enemy, ISIS," the U.S. coalition said. "Ultimately, the coalition believes that ISIS is the root cause of the death and destruction."

---

Nazih Osseiran and Nathan Hodge contributed to this article.