U.S. News: From  ISIS  to Prosecutors' Aide --- New counterterrorism effort enlists a former recruit to help with early intervention

By Nicole Hong 
878 words
8 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn believe they have found a special weapon in their fight against terrorism: a young man named Mo.

Mo, a U.S. citizen whose full name is under seal, left New York City in the summer of 2014 to join Islamic State in Syria. Now 28 years old, Mo quickly became disillusioned, he says now. Four months in, he sent an email to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. "Please help me get home," he wrote, according to court documents. "I'm fed up with this evil."

While the FBI was still verifying the email, a civilian smuggler helped Mo escape and reach a U.S. State Department outpost in Turkey.

Authorities in November 2014 deported Mo back to Brooklyn, where he pleaded guilty to two terrorism charges.

Since then, Mo's work with the U.S. government has included an unusual form of cooperation: conducting an intervention with a 15-year-old boy from Brooklyn who was posting tweets that appeared to support violence and Islamic State, also known as ISIS. The intervention so far has successfully dissuaded the teenager from joining the terrorist group. Mo, whose offenses carry a maximum sentence of 25 years in prison, will likely be sentenced by a federal judge this summer.

The use of Mo became one catalyst for a new counterterrorism initiative by the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office. The effort is aimed at getting law enforcement to intervene earlier with terror suspects before they take substantial steps toward violence or traveling overseas. It also hopes to connect suspects with mental-health counselors, mentors and defectors like Mo.

The initiative is the brainchild of Seth DuCharme, who leads the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office's national-security and cybercrime unit. As the volume of terrorist-related threats online has grown, Mr. DuCharme said law enforcement needs a new approach for suspects who post worrisome statements but don't yet warrant criminal prosecution.

Islamic State's propaganda videos have been particularly appealing to young people who are loners or have mental-health issues, prosecutors say. Other U.S. jurisdictions have considered so-called "deradicalization" programs, a recognition that some suspects are young enough to turn their lives around.

Prosecutors in the Eastern District of New York have been among the most active in bringing terrorism cases, according to researchers.

"We are not deferring prosecution of terrorists. That notion would be absurd," said Brooklyn U.S. Attorney Robert Capers.

Under the new initiative, Brooklyn federal prosecutors will also use more discretion before charging someone with providing "material support" to terrorists, a broad violation.

Ironically, the government's initial miscalculation with Mo shows what can go wrong with an early intervention.

FBI agents first confronted Mo at his home in Brooklyn in June 2014.

At the time, Mo, who grew up Muslim in Brooklyn, had dropped out of Columbia University and worked as a cabdriver. In an interview, Mo said he had become increasingly religious and sought answers about Islam online, which led him to terrorist recruiters posing as credible scholars. "I ended up in a bubble because I wasn't going to school," he said.

During the FBI's visit, Mo told the agents he supported groups fighting the Syrian government but lacked the resources to get there, according to the court documents.

One week later, Mo boarded a flight to Istanbul. He said the FBI visit made him realize if he wanted to live under Shariah law, he had to act quickly.

Since Mo's return, he has spent a lot of time assisting prosecutors, such as flagging the deeper meaning behind tweets from Islamic State supporters.

Mo told the government he hoped his cooperation "would prevent him from spending the rest of his life in jail," according to court documents.

Mo said he hopes to keep helping the government turn terror suspects away from Islamic State's ideology. "These are people who don't think killing is wrong and don't think anything of hurting innocent people," he said. "I can't be apathetic to that.

---

Risks of a Failed

Intervention Give

Skeptics Pause

The new counterterrorism effort represents a gamble for the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office and other agencies involved, including the FBI.

A failed early intervention where a suspect ends up committing a terrorist attack would likely mean the end of the project, officials say. Meanwhile, there are no clear metrics for measuring its success.

"We're taking an incredible amount of risk because we're talking about providing a resource that isn't necessarily what the FBI typically does," one law-enforcement official said.

Skeptics of Brooklyn's initiative say they are uncomfortable giving terrorism suspects the chance to change their behavior before an arrest. Such opportunities aren't typically afforded to gang members, corrupt politicians or other types of criminals, say current and former officials.

A major hurdle for Brooklyn is identifying which suspects are amenable to an early intervention. According to former prosecutors, intervening before an arrest could tip a terror suspect off to government surveillance.

-- Nicole Hong

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170308ed3800014
