US
U.S. Officials See Terror Intervention as Possible Future Model; FBI coordinated 2016 meeting between teen suspect in New York and  ISIS  defector

By Nicole Hong | Photography by Kholood Eid for The Wall Street Journal 
1,010 words
7 March 2017
16:40
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Early last year, agents with the Federal Bureau of Investigation showed up at Nephetia Brown's home in Brooklyn's East New York neighborhood with some alarming news.

They said her son, now 15 years old, was tweeting about Islamic State's violent ideologies. He may be on his way to jail, they told her.

But instead of arresting her son, FBI agents decided to try a novel approach. They asked him to undergo an intervention with an Islamic State defector named Mo.

Mo's intervention with T.—he first initial of the teenager's name—as proved successful, for now.

In New York, the FBI monitors hundreds of potential terror suspects every day, and some pro-Islamic State posts online have been traced to kids as young as elementary-school age, one official said. Officials are wrestling with how to deal with minors like T. who support Islamic State on social media but haven't yet committed any violence or crimes.

The intervention involving Mo and T. is being lauded by officials as a potential future model for dealing with young terror suspects who don't warrant prosecution. Some officials have called the intervention unprecedented, and it represents an important test case as law-enforcement officials in Brooklyn embark on a new counterterrorism program aimed at intervening earlier with terrorism suspects.

When the FBI agents showed up at Ms. Brown's house, the 36-year-old electrical apprentice was shocked. Ms. Brown, who is Christian, knew her son had begun converting to Islam in middle school, but she hadn't found anything unusual when she monitored his online activities.

According to Ms. Brown, the FBI told her that for several months, using aliases, T. had been tweeting about Islamic State, saying he wanted to "take part in an act" and "help the cause."

"I guess I wasn't looking for the right thing or in the right place," Ms. Brown said. "I was disappointed with myself because it happened right in my house."

She told the FBI that her son's online persona didn't reflect who he really was. Her son had been diagnosed with Asperger's syndrome and depression, she said. He had few friends, and the online following he gained by tweeting about Islamic State may have given him a sense of acceptance, she said.

During the first visit, the FBI spent three hours interrogating Ms. Brown and her son. After hearing about T.'s psychological issues and seeing his family situation, the FBI decided not to arrest him. Agents still visit his home every few months.

An FBI agent coordinated the intervention between T. and Mo, partly because the agent thought the two had similar backgrounds. Mo, who also grew up in Brooklyn, joined Islamic State in Syria in 2014 but escaped a few months later. He has since returned to the U.S. and is cooperating with the government.

The intervention happened last July in a bright, windowless conference room at the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office.

T. showed up with only his mother. As everyone in the room ate pizza, Mo tried to bond with T. "You know that crazy guy who comes on the 2 train and nobody makes eye contact with him?" Mo said, according to people at the intervention. "Everyone in ISIS is far worse than that guy."

Initially, T. sat quietly. But he opened up when Mo asked him to name his favorite propaganda video. T. said he liked a video in which Islamic State soldiers are shown picking up garbage and helping women and children in Syria. Mo replied that he saw for himself how the propaganda videos were all lies.

T. began to pepper Mo with questions. For over an hour, Mo picked apart his assumptions about Islamic State, describing the harsh reality of living in Syria.

As the meeting ended, Ms. Brown cried and hugged the agents, who asked T. to write an essay describing what he took away from the intervention.

Since then, T. hasn't taken any steps toward violence, but he is still on a bumpy path. A few weeks after the intervention, T. regained access to his cellphone, which had been confiscated by his mother. He immediately started tweeting again about Islamic State and hasn't been able to use a phone ever since. T.'s only access to a computer is at his high school in Brooklyn, where he is in 10th grade.

"This effort requires constant vigilance," said Brooklyn U.S. Attorney Robert Capers, referring to T.'s case. "We are ready to take law enforcement action if the subject makes a wrong turn."

There are signs of progress, too. He has a 78% grade point average, joined the filmmaking club at school and wants to go to college, according to Ms. Brown. Weekly therapy sessions have helped him become more outgoing and less emotional, she said.

It isn't clear how long FBI agents will continue to monitor T. They check in with his progress at school and have taken him to a Dave & Buster's restaurant, Ms. Brown said. She said she feels the agents have become part of her family.

During this period, Ms. Brown also separated from her husband and was raising two other sons below the age of 6. Ms. Brown said the family turmoil was one reason T. felt ignored and turned to the internet for attention.

Ms. Brown says she sometimes still worries about T. running away from home. In her mind, the teen will be risk-free when she no longer has concerns about him being near a computer.

"I take it a day at a time," she said. "It's unfortunate that it's happened, but the only thing we can do is move forward."

Write to Nicole Hong at nicole.hong@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170307ed37002fr
