N.Y. / Region
Worry and Disbelief in Yemeni-American Community in Brooklyn

By LIZ ROBBINS 
1,027 words
29 January 2017
18:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Women in hijabs and men in jeans strolled along Fifth Avenue in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn,on Saturday night beneath the signs of stores and restaurants written in Arabic. It would have seemed a typical Saturday night in one of New York’ largest Yemeni-American neighborhoods.

Except that inside those storefronts and cafes, there was worry, disbelief and emergency meetings, prompted by President Donald J. Trump’ executive orders that temporarily banned visa-holders and green cardholders from seven predominantly Muslim countries. Among those countries was Yemen.

At the Al-Noor Social Center, 20 Yemeni-American business and community leaders from across the city met to share information in Arabic and English about friends and relatives detained at airports across the United States. Everyone knew someone, or was on social media with someone affected. They decried the president’ executive orders.

“rump grew up in Queens, Yemenis were his neighbors,”aled Alamarie, 44, said. “hat’ his New York.”

Mr. Alamarie came to the United States when he was 10. He is a New York Giants season ticket holder and works for the city’ Department of Environmental Protection. His brother, Amrr, 24, was born in New York and is a director of the John Adams High School STEM Academy in Ozone Park, teaching math, science and technology.

“hat drew me out today is that I have an immigration case pending for my wife,”mrr Alamarie said. His wife, from Yemen, has been unable to get a visa to the United States for two years and now does not know when that will happen. They have a 3-month old daughter. “t’ hard not seeing myself living that American life,”e said.

Yemen is embroiled in a war between rebels aligned with Iran known as Houthi and Saudi Arabia-backed fighters that forced the closure of the U.S. embassy in Sana in 2015. For Yemenis seeking American visas, most have had to go to Malaysia or Djibouti to wait. Under President Obama, some Yemenis had their U.S. passports confiscated in Sana.

“verybody’ afraid,”aid Zaid Nagi, 38, who came straight from the protest at John F. Kennedy Airport to the emergency meeting. “hat kind of guarantee do we have if they don’ honor a visa they issue themselves? Or a birth certificate? Where do they draw the line?”

Anas Alhajj, 26, said he was involved in student uprisings in Sana. He received asylum, and now works for a Yemeni newspaper based in Bay Ridge, but he is worried, he said, that his status could be revoked.

“ou have to understand where we came from, there’ a lot of hardship, dictatorships,”aled Alamarie explained. “n their mind, they’e thinking that they’e going to disappear, just like they disappear in Egypt, in Yemen. They just don’ believe it.”

The meeting was organized by Debbie Almontaser,the president of the board of directors for the Muslim Community Network and a national board member of the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee.

“f you know people who are at the airports, let them know to refuse to go back on the plane and not to sign any documents. Ask for a lawyer,”he said to the group of men around the table.

“ear,”he said earlier in the day, “s reverberating through our community.”

But there was also pride. Ibrahim Qatabi, a legal assistant at a nonprofit, said that his great-grandfather came by boat to the United States from Yemen. His grandfather worked in Buffalo for the railroad. His father was a merchant marine.

“nd now to be treated as a second-class citizen?”r. Qatabi, 37, who works for the Center for Constitutional Rights, said.

“e’e not refugees,”e said. “he people who were rejected today are relatives of U.S. citizens.”

Mr. Qatabi worried about the psychological impact this order, which has been described as a Muslim ban, could have. “hat we worry about more than ever is that Trump’ executive orders will embolden and encourage people to be racist, to openly discriminate against people of color, against people who come from the Middle East and especially these seven countries.”

But one neighborhood activist within the Arab-American community in Bay Ridge was conspicuously absent. She thought the temporary ban was good policy. Kathy Khatari, an Irish-American who married into a Yemeni-American family and is a proud Muslim, said that she fully supports Mr. Trump. Cheers him, in fact.

“t’ about God-damn time,”s. Khatari said. “ho cares, as long as we know who we are letting in. Do you know an ordinary Yemeni from someone from ISIS? No —ecause we don’. I’l take inconvenience for safety.”

Yemen was the site of the first counterterrorism raid Mr. Trump authorized, an attack of Al Qaeda headquarters that had killed an estimated 14 Qaeda fighters and one U.S. commando, the Pentagon said on Sunday morning.

For those in Bay Ridge, the fighting seemed so distant. The manager of the popular Yemen Cafén Fifth Avenue, Nasser Alsubai, 28, disagreed about the imminent danger, or implication that people seeking to come to the United States from these seven countries were terrorists. He is a U.S. citizen, naturalized after he came to New York at age 6.

“ny Yemeni family that you find here in America are all working hard to support family in Yemen,”r. Alsubai said.

“ow is going to make things better towards his agenda?”e added of Mr. Trump. “e’ going to make us go back in time. Like the camps with the Japanese. We’e fighting all over the world for every single country to have democracy, but we’e not doing it here.”

* Trump’ Executive Order on Immigration: What We Know and What We Don’

* Protest Grows ‘ut of Nowhere’t Kennedy Airport After Iraqis Are Detained

* White House Official, in Reversal, Says Green Card Holders Won’ Be Barred

* Christian Leaders Denounce Trump’ Plan to Favor Christian Immigrants

Document NYTFEED020170129ed1t002bd
