World
Thousands More Troops Needed in Afghanistan, Top U.S. Commander Tells Senate Panel; Army Gen. John Nicholson also said Russia's meddling complicating fight against counterterrorism

By Associated Press 
884 words
10 February 2017
07:33
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON— few thousand more troops are needed to help end the stalemate in Afghanistan, according to a senior U.S. military commander who also told lawmakers that Russian meddling was complicating the counterterrorism fight.

Army Gen. John Nicholson, commander of U.S. forces in Afghanistan, didn't provide the Senate Armed Services Committee with an exact number of additional forces. However, he said Thursday they could come from the U.S. or other countries in the U.S.-led coalition in Afghanistan, where the war is now in its 16th year.

He said they were necessary to properly train and advise the Afghan military and perform work now handled at greater cost by contractors. There are currently about 8,400 U.S. troops conducting counterterrorism operations against insurgents and training the Afghan army.

Gen. Nicholson said he had discussed troop levels with Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and Gen. Joseph Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Gen. Nicholson said he believes the Trump administration will be open to a level based on requirements, rather than a predetermined figure. Republicans criticized former President Barack Obama for trying, in their view, to cut the number too sharply before he left office Jan. 20.

Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.), the committee chairman, said after the hearing he would back Nicholson's request and called the boost a "penalty" to be paid for former President Barack Obama's refusal to commit enough forces. "When the general says we're not winning? And the Russians are increasing their influence? And al Qaeda is increasing? We really have no choice," Sen. McCain told reporters.

But the idea of sending more Americans to the war zone might not go over well with a public frustrated by the length and cost of the conflict. Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D., Mass.), citing figures from the special inspector general for Afghanistan reconstruction, said the war was costing U.S. taxpayers $13 million a day.

Gen. Nicholson also disclosed that a U.S. Special Forces soldier was "severely wounded" in fighting Thursday in Sangin, the Taliban heartland in southern Afghanistan. He gave an example of how additional forces would be used. Gen. Nicholson said that because of troop level limits, the aviation brigade that deployed to Afghanistan was able to bring its helicopters, pilots and staff, but had to leave its mechanics behind at Fort Riley in Kansas.

Contractors were hired instead at a cost of "tens of millions of dollars," forcing the soldier mechanics to sit at home, Gen. Nicholson said, and affecting the Army unit's readiness. He said there was a 2-1 ratio of contractors to troops in Afghanistan.

In response to a question from Sen. Claire McCaskill (D., Mo.), Gen. Nicholson said he didn't have enough troops to provide proper oversight of all those contractors.

Gen. Nicholson contended that Russia had been publicly legitimizing the Taliban by claiming that the militants were fighting Islamic terrorists while the Afghan government wasn't. He called that a "false narrative" and argued that Moscow's goal was to undermine the U.S. and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in Afghanistan.

Afghan security forces have reduced by one-half the number of Islamic State fighters and by two-thirds the amount of territory the extremists hold, according to the commander.

He declined to say in the open hearing whether Russia was providing support for the Taliban and in what way. Afterward, Gen. Nicholson told the Associated Press he was referring to classified intelligence. He wouldn't discuss the matter further.

The Russians recently invited representatives from the Taliban, as well as from China, Pakistan and other countries in the region, to Moscow for meetings about Afghanistan's future, but didn't include officials from the Kabul government, Gen. Nicholson said.

"A peace and reconciliation process should be Afghan-led," the general said.

Despite Moscow's overtures, Gen. Nicholson said many Afghans don't view Russia favorably, dating to the Soviet invasion and occupation of Afghanistan from 1979 to 1989.

Several Republican senators Thursday urged President Donald Trump to pursue a "tough-minded and principled policy toward" Russia. They want Mr. Trump to maintain current U.S. sanctions against Russia, rebuke Moscow for its continued aggression in Ukraine, and not enter into any military or diplomatic agreement with Russia on Syria's future until Moscow ends its "support for the murderous regime" of President Bashar al-Assad.

Gen. Nicholson described the security situation in Afghanistan as a "stalemate."

"Can we win?" asked Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.). Yes, Gen. Nicholson said. He described victory as a stable, centralized Afghan government and destruction of al Qaeda and Islamic State. Leaving before then means it is "just a matter of time" before terrorists launch another attack on the U.S. from havens in Afghanistan, he said.

Copyright 2017 The Associated Press.

Related

* Suicide Bomber Strikes Outside Afghan Supreme Court

* U.N. Report Says Civilian Casualties at Record High in Afghanistan

* A New U.S. Front in Afghanistan?

* When President Trump Goes to War

* Thousands Flee Fighting in Northern Afghanistan

* What Happens After \b ISIS\b0  Falls?

Document WSJO000020170210ed2a0030d
