Interactives
World Press Photo Announces Contest Winners; The World Press Photo Foundation announced its picks of the best photojournalism of the year. Here are some of the winners. Please note, some of the photos are graphic.

628 words
13 February 2017
21:28
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Civilians escape from a fire at a house destroyed by an air attack in Luhanskaya village in Ukraine.

Two men panic and struggle in the water during their rescue. Their rubber boat was in distress and deflating quickly on one side, tipping many migrants in the water. They were quickly reached by rescue swimmers and brought to safety.

Adriana Cordeiro Soares, 30 years old, bathes her three-month-old son who was born with microcephaly caused by the Zika virus, in her house in the rural area of Sao Vicente do Serido, Brazil.

A view of the Quezon City Jail, one of the Philippines's most overcrowded prisons. Conditions are getting worse as police wage an unprecedented war on crime. There are 3,800 inmates at the jail, which was built six decades ago to house 800, and they engage in a relentless contest for space. Men take turns sleeping on the cracked cement floor of an open-air basketball court, the steps of staircases and underneath beds and hammocks made out of old blankets.

A man is treated with milk of magnesia after being pepper sprayed by police at a blockade near a camp in opposition to the Dakota Access Pipeline project. Members of the Standing Rock Sioux tribe object to the pipeline being built for they say it will threaten their water supply.

A bear skin is nailed to the outside of a house in Nizhnyaya, Russia. The bear apparently came to the village at night, ate the dogs and attacked people.

Mevlut Mert Altintas shouted after shooting Andrei Karlov, the Russian ambassador to Turkey, at an art gallery in Ankara, Turkey. The jury of the 60th annual photo contest chose this image by Associated Press Turkish photographer Burhan Ozbilici as the World Press Photo of the Year.

A barber shop in Old Havana, Cuba.

An ISIS fighter is violently pushed by Libyan fighters affiliated with the government in Tripoli who shout and threaten to lynch him. A few minutes later the fighter was found in the same place shot dead multiple times.

Lawyers try to help their injured colleagues after a bomb explosion in Quetta, Pakistan. Some 70 people were killed when a bomb exploded outside a civil hospital where a crowd of lawyers and journalists had gathered to mourn Bilal Anwar Kasi, a senior lawyer who had been assassinated hours earlier.

A girl stands outside while Iraqi Special Operations Forces search houses in Gogjali, an eastern district of Mosul, for

members of Daesh, or ISIS, or their equipment.

A woman holds her two-year-old nephew who was injured from a bomb blast in Kabul.

Muddy York Rugby Football Club plays against the Nashville Grizzlies during the semifinal of the Hoagland Shield at the Ted Rhodes Park in Nashville, Tennessee. Nashville beat Toronto 15-0.

Heavy rain came down as police operatives investigated an alley where 37-year-old Romeo Joel Torres Fontanilla was killed by two unidentified gunmen riding motorcycles in the early morning in Manila, Philippines.

Care for Wild Africa is a donor-run organization that specializes in caring for wounded animals in Nelspruit, South Africa. The group has taken in many rhinoceros orphans hurt in the poaching wars across South Africa. Pictured here is Lulah, whose mother was killed in Kruger National Park. When the rangers found Lulah she was estimated to be one month old.

Activist Ieshia Evans stood her ground while offering her hands for arrest as she is charged by riot police during a protest against police brutality outside the Baton Rouge Police Department in Louisiana.

Document WSJO000020170213ed2d007y5
