Potomac Watch
Democrats Get Smart in Georgia

By Kimberley A. Strassel 
863 words
21 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Voters in Georgia's conservative Sixth District had a dizzying 18 candidates on the ballot Tuesday, though one in particular stood out.

It was the politician who touted a background of "working with our military and intelligence community to keep Georgians safe," and who vowed to "honor law enforcement." It was the candidate who boasted of being an entrepreneur, who promised to "reduce the tax burden" and "simplify small business tax filing." It was the candidate who promised to get rid of "wasteful spending" and "corruption" in Washington and to promote a "fiscally responsible economic policy."

That candidate? The Democrat. Jon Ossoff.

Republicans are crowing that they denied Mr. Ossoff an outright majority in Tuesday's jungle primary, and that he now faces long odds in a June 20 runoff against the GOP's Karen Handel, who is rapidly uniting the conservative side. They sought to make the race about the outside money backing Mr. Ossoff, as well as his residence outside the district and the fact that he's a liberal.

All this is true, yet it ignores the important point: Mr. Ossoff very nearly won. Republicans would do well to understand why. It wasn't some brewing backlash against Republicans, or any demographic shift, or a rejection of the Trump administration, or other Democratic talking points. He nearly won because after eight years of arrogance and electoral stupidity under Barack Obama, Democrats may be wising up.

In 2006 the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, under then-chairman Rahm Emanuel, achieved a blowout House majority by running candidates who could win conservative districts. It was a different Democratic Party back then. Mr. Emanuel won by fielding moderates and Blue Dogs.

Mr. Ossoff is no Blue Dog. He's more a new breed of liberal populist. Dig into his positions and he checks nearly every progressive touchstone. He's for a federal "living wage." He's a climate crusader. He rallies for criminal-justice reform. He's pro-choice and against Citizens United. At the same time, however, he tries to tap the public discontent that fueled Mr. Trump. He rails against wasteful spending and corruption. He defends small businesses over "special interest" lobbyists. He highlights his interest in national security and condemns the "atrocities" of ISIS.

Mr. Ossoff and his backers very adroitly delivered his different messages to all the right crowds. In small events and phone calls and fundraisers, party elders pitched Mr. Ossoff's progressive positions to grass-roots activists. This reassurance, along with an acute desire to deliver Mr. Trump a defeat, drew liberal troops. The Daily Kos launched a full-throated online fundraising campaign for him. MoveOn.org endorsed him and ran a six-figure TV and digital ad campaign. The DCCC riled up key demographics, running targeted radio ads calling on African-American voters to "send a clear message to Donald Trump that racism and intolerance are never OK."

But in public or in large appearances, Mr. Ossoff delivered to conservative and moderate voters an uncontroversial message of national security, small-business support and swamp draining. He went so far as to promise to set up a dedicated investigative unit in his congressional office to root out "fraud" in the federal government. He hammered away at a pledge to bring high-tech jobs to the district. He rarely talked about Mr. Trump, and danced around ObamaCare.

This played well. Georgia's Sixth District leans conservative but sports quite a few affluent, educated moderates -- many of whom have doubts about Mr. Trump. The district went for Mitt Romney by 23 points, but Mr. Trump won by only 1.5 points. Despite all the focus on Mr. Trump's success with blue-collar, Rust Belt and rural districts, the Republican House majority depends just as much on keeping suburban and exurban districts like Georgia's Sixth. Mr. Ossoff's candidacy suggests this is where Democrats will make their play.

True, the Ossoff bid comes amid an escalating battle over the soul of the Democratic Party. This week featured a so-called unity tour between progressive firebrand Bernie Sanders and the Democratic National Committee's new chief, Tom Perez. There were a fair share of awkward moments, as when Mr. Sanders expounded on the need for single-payer health care, and Mr. Perez stared uncomfortably into the middle distance.

At one point, Mr. Sanders even took a shot at Mr. Ossoff, declaring that the Georgian wasn't a real "progressive." This, fascinatingly, earned Mr. Sanders a rebuke from none other than the Daily Kos, which declared that "the last thing we need is Sen. Sanders weighing in" on who fits "his ideal of a progressive." The post finished: "We cannot impeach Trump and pass a progressive agenda without a Democratic majority in Congress. Period."

Correct. And that very belated and intelligent assessment is why Republicans need to pay close attention to Mr. Ossoff and the Democratic strategy in Georgia. If the GOP doesn't start making good on its promises, it risks losing voters to Democrats who claim they can do better in Washington.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170421ed4l0000x
