World
Tunisian Migrant Under Investigation in Berlin Christmas Market Attack; Prosecutors say 26-year-old man was taken into custody in connection with a separate probe

By Ruth Bender 
916 words
4 January 2017
19:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BERLIN—erman federal prosecutors said Wednesday they were investigating a second Tunisian migrant for possible involvement in last month's deadly Christmas market attack in Berlin.

There wasn't enough evidence to detain the unnamed 26-year-old migrant for complicity in the attack, but he was taken into custody Tuesday in connection with a separate investigation, said Frauke Köler, spokeswoman for the prosecutor's office.

Anis Amri, the Tunisian man who killed 12 people when he rammed a stolen truck into a crowded Berlin Christmas market on December 19, was shot dead four days later by Italian police near Milan.

The attack, the most serious in recent German history, and the fact that Amri had long been known to the authorities as a criminal and Islamist extremist have raised questions about the preparedness of German authorities and the country's vulnerability to further attacks.

Investigators had found that Amri and the detained man had met on the night before the attack in a restaurant in Berlin's Mitte district and spoken at length, Ms. Köler said.

"This raised the suspicion that the 26 year old might have been involved in the crime or at least have known of the plans," she said.

German investigators have been trying to establish whether Amri had any accomplices in carrying out the attack or in making his escape from the country.

In late December, prosecutors had briefly detained another Tunisian they believed might be connected to the attack but they released him as it turned out to be the wrong person.

Tuesday's arrest is the latest instance of how police and prosecutors, in a tug of war with judges, have sought alternative grounds to detain possibly dangerous individuals whenever they lacked firm evidence they were planning attacks.

In November, authorities briefly detained an asylum seeker suspected of plotting an attack for Islamic State, or ISIS, here but a federal judge ruled he couldn't be kept for lack of evidence. Prosecutors in Berlin then had him arrested on suspicion of forging documents.

In this case, the Berlin state prosecutor's office said the 26-year-old was under investigation for fraud. He is suspected of using forged identities in different states to illegally collect benefits set aside for asylum seekers. He arrived in Germany in 2014, according to a spokesman for the Berlin prosecutor.

Berlin prosecutors had previously investigated the man on suspicion of planning an attack. The inquiry was closed in June 2016 after investigators failed to prove the suspect had obtained explosives, the prosecutor's office said.

Federal prosecutors also searched the apartment of a former roommate of Amri in Berlin Tuesday who the now-dead attacker tried to reach on the morning and in the afternoon of the day of the attack. The two men had shared a room in an apartment in Berlin last year.

While investigators continue to hunt for potential accomplices, more details emerged of Amri's movements right before and immediately after the attack that indicate the attacker had carefully planned his moves.

Hours before crashing into the Christmas market, Amri lingered near the place where he stole the truck to commit his attack. Prosecutors believe it was there that Amri killed the Polish truck driver, before driving through town to the Christmas market.

Investigators have established that the weapon used to kill the Polish driver was the same one Amri shot with days later during a police check in Italy. .

In the hours before the attack, Amri briefly visited a Berlin-based Muslim association that German intelligence agencies see as one of the capital's main meeting groups for adherents to the ultraconservative Salafi branch of Islam.

Shortly after Amri managed to escape the scene of the attack, he was captured on a video camera at Berlin's busy Zoo station, located only a few meters from the scene of the crime.

"The pictures indicate that he knew he was being recorded," Ms. Köler said.

He turned to face the camera and pointed his raised index finger, a reference to the monotheism of Islam often used as an identifying sign by followers of ISIS.

Two days later, security camera footage showed Amri in Nijmegen, a Dutch city near the German border, and a few hours later in Amsterdam, Ms. Köler said. His further escape route led him through Lyon and Chambery in France on to Turin and Milan in Italy.

Belgium's federal prosecutor said Wednesday that Amri was in Brussels on Dec. 21, a confirmation that came after the city's railway police checked all security images of the Brussels North railway station.

Amri arrived in the Belgian capital by train coming from Amsterdam, at about 7 p.m. on Dec. 21, and stayed at the train station until about 9 p.m., the federal prosecutor's office said in a press release.

Viktoria Dendrinou contributed to this article.

Write to Ruth Bender at Ruth.Bender@wsj.com

Related

* German Interior Minister Calls for Security Overhaul After Berlin Christmas Market Attack (Jan. 3)

* Tunisian Man Linked to Truck Attacker Arrested in Berlin (Dec. 28) 

* Anis Amri, Suspected Berlin Attacker, Had a History of Criminal Activity, Extremism (Dec. 23)

* Backlash Swells in Germany as Hunt for Terrorist Ends (Dec. 23)

* Germany Ill-Prepared for Terror Fight, Critics Say (Dec. 22)

Document WSJO000020170104ed14006my
