World
U.S. Raid Kills Islamic State Official in Syria; Delta Force conducted a raid in eastern Syria to capture a militant leader and killed ‘ small number' of fighters

By Ben Kesling and Raja Abdulrahim 
513 words
10 January 2017
01:01
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he U.S. military's Delta Force killed an Islamic State official during a raid in eastern Syria over the weekend that was meant to capture the militant leader, a U.S. official said Monday.

The operation was conducted by the Expeditionary Targeting Force, elite troops commonly known as Delta Force. The raid didn't result in the capture of any militants, though a "small number" were killed during the fight near Deir Ezzour in Syria, the official said.

Such raids are typically not publicized by the Pentagon, but Sunday's was reported by local media, prompting a response from the Pentagon, which leads an international coalition helping to fight Islamic State in Syria. "The coalition can confirm a U.S. operation in the vicinity of Deir Ezzor," said a statement, using another name for Islamic State..

"The U.S. and the entire counter-ISIL Coalition will continue to pursue ISIL leaders wherever they are to ensure the security and stability of the region and our homelands," it added, using an acronym for Islamic State.

A local website, DeirEzzor24, reported that a group of commandos, including U.S. and Arab forces, landed by parachute on the outskirts of the town and arrested a number of Islamic State fighters before leaving. The website said no civilians were in harm's way during the operation.

The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported Monday that at least 25 Islamic State militants were killed during "an operation carried out by helicopter believed to belong to the International Coalition," the website reported.

The U.S. official said the team was made up entirely of U.S. commandos, didn't land by parachute and didn't make any arrests. The person targeted in the operation was killed in a firefight with the commandos, the official said. The Pentagon didn't identify the individual or say why the person was targeted by the operation.

U.S. special operations forces have steadily increased their presence in Syria and Iraq since the beginning of operations to push Islamic State from those countries. Americans often advise local forces and sometimes join them in operations.

A Delta Force commando, Master Sgt. Joshua Wheeler, was killed in 2015 when his unit assisted Kurdish Peshmerga forces on a raid near Kirkuk, Iraq, becoming the first American to be killed in action in Iraq since 2011 in Iraq.

In May 2015, U.S. special operations forces killed Abu Sayyaf, who ran Islamic State's oil operations, in a raid at his compound in Deir Ezzour province. The mission also captured a trove of documents and Mr. Abu Sayyaf's wife.

The Pentagon hasn't said how many operations U.S. forces have undertaken in Iraq and Syria, unaccompanied by local troops.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com and Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170110ed1a00001
