ON COMEDY
The Arts/Cultural Desk; SECTC
Kathy Griffin Flows From Defiant to Shaken to Fainting

By JASON ZINOMAN 
1,359 words
11 November 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DUBLIN -- Every era gets the Lenny Bruce it deserves. Ours is Kathy Griffin.

On Wednesday night, Ms. Griffin, 57, delivered a wild two-hour-and-15-minute performance that brought to mind Bruce's late period, when that comic's compelling if exhausting shows featured blow-by-blow analysis of his legal battles with the government.

At the start of Ms. Griffin's performance, which included raucous cheers, disarming boos and a premature finale when she fainted, she warned: ''I'm not going to stop talking until I'm arrested.''

A bit dramatic, sure, but not as much as you might think. Ms. Griffin embarked on this international tour, ''Laugh Your Head Off,'' after her American dates were canceled when she was photographed holding a Donald Trump mask smeared in ketchup. TMZ's headline: ''Kathy Griffin Beheads President Trump.''

Even though Mr. Trump has picked fights with everyone from Meryl Streep to the cast of ''Hamilton'' since being elected, he has gone after no artist as hard as Ms. Griffin. He wrote a blistering tweet, his wife released a strongly worded formal statement and his son Donald Jr. harshly criticized her on Fox News.

While Ms. Griffin joked on Wednesday, ''For two hours I had to convince my mom I wasn't in ISIS,'' her stories about the resulting furor were dark and even chilling.

As a result of this tasteless photo, Ms. Griffin didn't just receive death threats, lose gigs and sponsorship money, and get fired as a host of CNN's annual New Year's Eve special. She was also put on the no-fly list and became the subject of a Secret Service investigation for, she says, ''conspiracy to assassinate the president.'' When she asked the federal agent why the government was going to such extremes, the woman pointed upward, indicating, Ms. Griffin interpreted, that this came from the president himself.

Onstage, in front of red block letters spelling out her first name, Ms. Griffin wore the blue dress from the fateful photo, and appeared defiant one moment, shook up the next. She singled out stars who sent their support, fired back at celebrities who criticized the photo (look out, Alyssa Milano and Debra Messing), and got emotional about others, like Anderson Cooper, her co-host on New Year's Eve, who tweeted his disapproval. ''You know what Cher said?'' Ms. Griffin said onstage, shifting into an impression of her friend. ''Well, you wanted to be famous, bitch.''

The entire episode showed her to be the outsider she always said she was, skewering the famous while somehow being obsessed with them at the same time. In this regard, she's a perfect match for Mr. Trump, whom she has known for nearly two decades, dating to an episode of the 1990s sitcom ''Suddenly Susan'' on which both appeared. She remembered the moment on Wednesday: When he greeted her with ''Call me The Donald,'' she responded, ''Call me The Kathy.''

Mr. Trump may come from Queens and Ms. Griffin from suburban Chicago, but for some time now, they have both lived on Planet Celebrity. Though Ms. Griffin spent years making fun of Kim Kardashian, she moved next door to this reality TV star, and when not mocking the Trump family on Wednesday (she called his older sons ''Eddie Munster and Date Rape''), Ms. Griffin spilled secrets about the home life of Kanye West and Ms. Kardashian: They drive around in a Rolls-Royce golf cart and keep the mannequin of Taylor Swift from his ''Famous'' video in their house. ''Sometimes, late at night, I can hear them printing money,'' she quipped.

Ms. Griffin does not write taut jokes; she emerged from the West Coast alt-comedy scene of the 1990s, when comics were reacting against the machine-gun-joke style of comedy clubs and building acts on digressive stories and conversational riffs. Even then, Ms. Griffin relied on highly personal revelations, often shameless and sexual and sprinkled with celebrity dust. If she slept with Jack Black, she talked about it onstage, then wrote about talking about it.

She is famous for frivolity, derided by some peers for her obsession with boldface names. But it's not fair to chalk up Ms. Griffin's success to our culture's lust for scandal and stardom, though that's certainly part of it. ''I will be your guilty pleasure,'' she wrote in her best-selling 2009 memoir, ''Official Book Club Selection.''

Ms. Griffin, who reveres Joan Rivers, belongs to a glorious show-business tradition of hard-working, mouthy survivors with ambition to burn, an instinct for self-promotion and a chip on the shoulder. If she ever cared about alienating someone famous to get a laugh -- whether a network executive, a commander in chief or garden-variety actors doing their best -- she doesn't anymore. ''I have a lot of female hostility,'' she said Wednesday, pivoting from earnest to glib. ''It's very trendy.''

Some of that hostility is directed toward Harvey Levin, the TMZ founder, and Andy Cohen, the host of ''Watch What Happens Live'' and her replacement on the New Year's Eve show. After Mr. Cohen pretended that he didn't know who Ms. Griffin was in a video on TMZ, Ms. Griffin responded with a 17-minute video of her own in which she criticized both men for misogyny. She also revealed Mr. Levin's phone number and claimed that Mr. Cohen offered her cocaine twice (he has denied it).

Onstage she took shots at both of them again, but the variety of insults she leveled, some more thinly supported than others, made it seem as if she were just tossing out the kitchen sink, and not to funny ends. Ms. Griffin often veered off-course, and when she referred to ''being in the United Kingdom,'' she was startled by the angry reaction of the Dublin audience. The packed crowd of die-hard fans turned on her, hissing and booing. She seemed thrown off-balance, and had trouble returning to her story, not for the last time.

Some forceful directorial guidance could hone this wandering series of stories into a more refined show that sticks to a theme and a through-line revolving around Mr. Trump. But this messy, indulgent production instead gives us Ms. Griffin unfiltered, which has the benefit of seeming like a backstage gossip session, albeit one that lost steam as it headed past the 60-minute mark and she dabbed sweat from her forehead.

After more than two hours, Ms. Griffin started telling a story about Mariah Carey when she froze, looked down and slumped, suddenly silent. She leaned into the microphone and said: ''Randy, I'm going down.'' Her boyfriend hurried onstage and grabbed her. Before he escorted her offstage, she said, ''I'll be back.''

The crowd gasped and waited in the dark for minutes, until he helped Ms. Griffin back to the microphone, when she muttered something hard to hear over the cheers. What was clear was that the show was over. She later apologized in a video, saying she fainted.

It was a shockingly anxious end to the evening, revealing perhaps the toll this sprawling tour (or her recent controversies) has taken on her. But counting out a force of nature like Ms. Griffin is a mistake. Just as the condemnation of her Trump photo fueled this new show, her collapse just added more drama to an evening that did not lack for it. As she exited with assistance, she turned to the crowd and scrunched her face into a self-mocking grimace that seemed to say: How ridiculous is this?

Kathy Griffin last month in Los Angeles. In a performance in Dublin on Wednesday, she told her audience, ''I'm not going to stop talking until I'm arrested.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY GREG DOHERTY/GETTY IMAGES) (C1); Anderson Cooper and Kathy Griffin in Times Square during New Year's Eve celebrations in 2015. Ms. Griffin was fired as host off CNN's annual special. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLO ALLEGRI/REUTERS) (C4) 

Document NYTF000020171111edbb0004o
