Film Club
The Learning Network
Teaching With: ‘he Price of Certainty’

By MICHAEL GONCHAR 
634 words
13 January 2017
11:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Note: Teachers should preview the film above to make sure it is suitable for their students.

This short documentary explores the natural human need to find certainty during uncertain times, and how embracing that certainty can sometimes be a dangerous thing. It can lead us to make judgments regardless of facts. It can cause us to close our minds to new information.

How does this film relate to historical events? How can it relate to our world today? How might it connect with our own decision-making?

Students

1. Watch the seven-minute film above. While you watch, you might take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry Journal (PDF) to help you remember specific moments.

2. After watching, think about these questions:

•hat moments in the film stood out for you? Why?

•ere there any surprises? Anything that challenged what you know —r thought you knew?

•hat messages, emotions or ideas will you take away from this film? Why?

3. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment, although teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students have to say.)

4. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “eply”utton or the @ symbol to address that student directly.

5. To learn more, read the filmmaker’ explanation here. It begins:

It’ alarming to see how polarized politics have become in the United States. The wider the gulf grows, the more people seem to be certain that the other side is wrong. Certainty can be a dangerous thing.

Two years ago, I met the social psychologist Arie Kruglanski while researching a documentary about extremism. Dr. Kruglanski, a professor at the University of Maryland, studies what motivates people to join terrorist groups like ISIS. My producing partner, Eric Strauss, and I had fascinating conversations with Dr. Kruglanski about the psychology of binary thinking, and decided to make a short film about his work instead.

Dr. Kruglanski is best known for his theory of “ognitive closure,” term he coined in 1989 to describe how we make decisions. “losure”s the moment that you make a decision or form a judgment. You literally close your mind to new information.

If you have high “eed for closure,”ou tend to make decisions quickly and see the world in black and white. If you have a low need for closure, you tolerate ambiguity, but often have difficulty making decisions. All of us fall naturally somewhere on this spectrum.

But during times of fear and anxiety —ike, for example, right now —verybody’ need for closure increases. We tend to make judgments more quickly, regardless of the facts. We’e also drawn to leaders who are decisive and paint solutions in simple terms. After the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, Dr. Kruglanski and his team of researchers found that as the color-coded terrorism threat system increased, support for President George W. Bush went up accordingly. The more uncertain our world seems, the more we compensate by seeking out certainty.

Dr. Kruglanski has spent his career studying the consequences of this psychology. This film is an effort to impart some of his wisdom as we navigate these uncertain times.

_________

More?

•ee all the films in this series.

•ead our list of practical teaching ideas, along with responses from students and teachers, for how you can use these documentaries in the classroom.

•ur next Film Club will take place on Friday, Jan. 20.

There's more to what you believe than you think. | By DANIELE ANASTASION 

Document NYTFEED020170113ed1d003ux
