Politics
Trump Urges Scrutiny of Alleged Spying on His Transition Team; ‘eal story' is alleged improper monitoring by Obama administration, president says

By Paul Sonne     and Shane Harris 
1,142 words
4 April 2017
06:44
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump and his supporters in Congress said they hoped investigators scrutinize whether Obama administration officials improperly spied on members of his team during the transition and requested that the identities of Trump staff members be revealed, or "unmasked," in intelligence reports chronicling the surveillance.

Mr. Trump said on Twitter Monday that the "real story" is improper surveillance of his team by the Obama administration during the transition.

White House press secretary Sean Spicer said on Monday that the administration's concerns about the Obama administration's role in unmasking identities in the intelligence reports is moving in a "troubling direction." He declined to comment further.

Mr. Spicer declined to comment specifically on allegations published by a Bloomberg News columnist and by Fox News that former President Barack Obama's national security adviser, Susan Rice, requested to unmask the names of Mr. Trump's associates caught up in incidental surveillance collection.

Ms. Rice declined to comment.

Mr. Trump is facing two congressional investigations into Russia's alleged meddling in the election—ne that has faltered amid partisan acrimony in the House and another that is proceeding apace in the Senate. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is also conducting its own investigation.

Russia has repeatedly denied meddling in the election. Mr. Trump and his aides have denied any collusion with Russia. And a representative for Mr. Obama has declined to comment on the White House's allegation that Mr. Obama's team engaged in efforts to leak sensitive intelligence information for political purposes.

FBI Director James Comey has said there is no evidence backing an allegation last month by Mr. Trump, a Republican, that Mr. Obama, a Democrat, ordered surveillance of Trump Tower. But Rep. Devin Nunes, a California Republican and chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, has alleged that Trump associates were subject to incidental surveillance while talking to foreign officials and in certain cases had their names unmasked improperly.

Mr. Trump said in a tweet in early March that his campaign was ordered "wiretapped" by Mr. Obama. After the allegation was criticized as baseless, White House staffer Ezra Cohen-Watnick began examining policies on surveillance and started to "stumble on stuff," said a person familiar with the matter.

Mr. Cohen-Watnick told White House colleague Michael Ellis and others, this person said, but White House general counsel Don McGahn told them to stand down and to give anything they found to Congress, said a second person familiar with the matter.

Soon after, Mr. Nunes went to the White House to examine what he has called new evidence of improprieties under Mr. Obama. He hasn't produced any of the evidence, while infuriating committee Democrats, who said he undermined the probe. Mr. Nunes has apologized to Democrats, while refusing calls to recuse himself.

The first person familiar with the matter said the documents showed "a lot of incidental information that was unmasked" and seemed to have been done "for only one reason."

Mr. Nunes has denied White House staffers were his source for the material.

On Monday, Mr. Trump promoted a report on the Fox News morning show "Fox & Friends" saying that Mr. Trump and people close to him were surveilled for up to a year before the end of the Obama administration.

"Such amazing reporting on unmasking and the crooked scheme against us by @foxandfriends," Mr. Trump tweeted. "'Spied on before nomination.' The real story."

Jennifer Palmieri, who was director of communications for Democrat Hillary Clinton's presidential campaign, accused Mr. Trump's administration on Twitter of engaging in "such absurd kabuki." The White House should just release the allegations itself, she suggested.

​OP members of the House Intelligence Committee are pushing to find out what role top Obama administration officials played in requesting that names of Trump associates be unmasked from U.S. intelligence reports, according to a Republican lawmaker familiar with the committee's deliberations.

Names of U.S. citizens end up in intelligence reports when their conversations with foreign targets are recorded or when two foreign targets mention them in conversation. In such cases, names of the Americans are removed and replaced with general designations such as "U.S. Official 1."

Certain national security leaders, however, have the authority to request the identity of an American be unmasked, for example if they feel it is necessary to understand the context of a report and whether it is relevant.

Mr. Nunes has said he reviewed sensitive documents at the White House that showed evidence of Americans involved in the Trump transition having their names unmasked improperly after they were caught in incidental surveillance.

Neither Mr. Nunes nor the White House has made any evidence public to substantiate the allegations that the Obama administration unmasked names in intelligence reports improperly.

Unmasking is a routine action and is overseen by individual intelligence agencies, according to former U.S. intelligence officials who have been involved in the process.

A government official can't unmask a name unilaterally, these people said. First, an official with the authority to make the request—he national security adviser is one of them—ust contact the agency that wrote the intelligence report and has the final say on whether the name can be revealed.

If an Obama administration official in the White House, for example, wanted to know the identity of a U.S. person included in a report from the National Security Agency, he or she would have to ask NSA officials to unmask it, the former officials said.

At the NSA, about 20 officials, including the agency's director, have the authority to approve unmasking requests, NSA Director Adm. Mike Rogers told the House Intelligence Committee last month.

The NSA, which routinely intercepts the conversations of foreign official overseas, uses two criteria when deciding whether to approve an unmasking request, Adm. Rogers said. First, does the official making the request have a need to know the name for official purposes, Adm. Rogers said. And second, "Is the identification necessary to truly understand the context of the intelligence value that the report is designed to generate?" he said.

Carol E. Lee contributed to this article.

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Administration Considers Far-Reaching Steps for ‘xtreme Vetting'

* Trump Administration Reopens H-1B Program, With a Twist

* Battle Over Gorsuch Confirmation Is Set to Hit Senate Floor

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy

* Ivanka Trump and Jared Kushner's Rent in Washington: $15,000 a Month

* Jerry Seib:A New Tribalism Spreads in Trump's Washington

* Trump Gains With Rural Supporters, Slips With Military Communities

Document WSJO000020170404ed440005l
