World
NATO Mulls Arctic and Atlantic Command to Counter Russia; Officials are discussing reviving a Cold War-era command to monitor increased Russian submarine activity

By Julian E. Barnes 
714 words
18 May 2017
17:52
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS—he North Atlantic Treaty Organization may revive a Cold War naval command to counter Moscow's increased submarine activity in the Arctic and protect Atlantic sea lanes in the event of a conflict, according to allied diplomats and officials briefed on the planning work.

Discussions about bringing back NATO's old Atlantic Command indicate that the alliance remains focused on improving allied defenses against a resurgent Russia despite the Trump administration's demand for a greater focus on counterterrorism.

Top military officers from NATO nations, including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs, U.S. Marine Gen. Joseph Dunford, gathered in Brussels this week received a briefing on a review of the command structure, including options for the Atlantic post.

Military planners and defense experts warn that Russia's submarine fleet is increasingly able to operate in the Arctic and North Atlantic without detection, as NATO's ability to monitor its activities have declined since the Cold War.

Developing strategies to protect Atlantic sea lanes has risen in importance amid an alliance resurrection of Cold War plans for moving heavy military equipment rapidly from the U.S. to Europe in case of a confrontation with Russia.

If that were to happen, military planners and defense experts believe Russia's submarine fleet could complicate protecting U.S. convoys.

Researchers from the Center for a New American Security, a Washington-based think tank, recently briefed NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg on military challenges in the Arctic and Atlantic. They laid out results of wargame simulation in which Russian subs interrupt an alliance military exercise, attack a U.S. military transport ship, and cut an undersea cable between Iceland and Canada, interrupting global communications.

An allied command focused on those issues, said NATO officials briefed on the review, could help create war plans to overcome challenges and prod allies to make crucial investments in surveillance planes, ships and other military hardware.

Czech Army Gen. Petr Pavel, the chairman of NATO's military committee who is leading the review, said new challenges, like Russia's use of so-called hybrid or nontraditional military tactics, as well as separate rising terrorism threats, necessitate the review. He declined to discuss details.

"We have to assess potential threats from any direction, including the North Atlantic, including the Arctic," Gen. Pavel said.

From 1952 to 2003, NATO had a Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, usually an admiral, headquartered in Norfolk, Va., who focused on plans to ship war materiel from the U.S. to Europe.

NATO aims to complete its command structure review by February 2018. But before then, alliance diplomats must hash out delicate political questions about what NATO member would lead the command, the precise responsibilities and where it would be located.

The deployment of a new 4,500 strong NATO force to the Baltic Sea region has increased the need to ensure the allies have the freedom to use the Atlantic Ocean to reinforce the forward-positioned troops, according to an alliance official.

The U.S. has allocated money to modernize Iceland's Keflavik Air Station. But Jerry Hendrix, a defense fellow at CNAS, said more allied resources including patrol boats, submarines and additional aircraft are needed for the Atlantic and Arctic.

If Russian subs can slip past Iceland undetected, they are able to hide easily and threaten U.S. reinforcements of European allies. Currently, in the event of a conflict with Moscow, allies would likely have to choose between escorting convoys carrying supplies to Europe or hunting Russian subs, said Mr. Hendrix, a retired Naval officer. If the U.S. can't move equipment to Europe, he said, the alliance will be weakened.

"It's important to patrol those waters," Mr. Hendrix said. "Once they get past Iceland it is like finding a needle in a haystack. Investments we make there are critical to guaranteeing victory in any future conflict."

Write to Julian E. Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com

Related

* U.S.-Led Airstrikes Hit Syrian Forces

* NATO Alliance Seen As Close to Joining Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 

* Middle East Crossroads: Egypt, Saudi Arabia Draw Closer Ahead of Trump Trip

Document WSJO000020170518ed5i001up
