World News: World Watch

364 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

AFGHANISTAN

U.S. Soldier Killed

In Anti-ISIS Fight

A U.S. special-forces soldier was killed during a combat operation targeting Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan, the U.S. military said.

The soldier died of wounds sustained during a joint mission with Afghan forces in the eastern province of Nangarhar. The U.S. military didn't provide any further details on the circumstances of the death.

The American soldier was the second to die fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since the U.S. expanded its operations against the group in January last year.

-- Jessica Donati

---

AUSTRALIA

Investment Review

Panel Chief Named

Australia appointed a former director of its spy agency to head the committee that reviews proposed investments from abroad, indicating a sharpened focus on national-security issues related to such deals.

Deals by Chinese suitors are frequently contested in Australia because many Chinese companies have close ties to the government in Beijing.

In a statement announcing David Irvine's appointment as Foreign Investment Review Board chief, Treasurer Scott Morrison didn't mention investment from China. However, Mr. Irvine is familiar with Beijing, having served as an ambassador there.

-- Rob Taylor

---

INDIA

Call-Fraud Organizer

Arrested in Mumbai

Indian police arrested the alleged mastermind behind a network of scam call centers that stole millions of dollars from Americans by fooling them into thinking they were in trouble with the taxman.

Sagar "Shaggy" Thakkar, who police say started facilities in Mumbai and elsewhere, had fled the country and traveled to Dubai and Bangkok. Police said he was arrested at the Mumbai airport as he re-entered the country early Saturday morning.

-- Corinne Abrams and Debiprasad Nayak

---

INDONESIA

Police Kill 6 Suspects

In East Java Firefight

Police killed six suspected Islamic militants in a gunbattle in a village in East Java, the National Police said Sunday.

The firefight took place Saturday in a paddy field after police chased and cornered a fleeing car whose occupants had earlier opened fire on a small police station in a village in Tuban district. Police said they found a box of ammunition in the car.

-- Anita Rachman

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170410ed4a0002f
