World
Iraq Takes the Fight Against  ISIS  to Syria; Strikes on foreign territory mark major escalation in fight against Islamic State

By Ben Kesling 
1,182 words
25 February 2017
01:19
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

The Iraqi airstrikes targeted the villages of Husaiba and Abu Kamal in Syria. An earlier version of this article misspelled Abu Kamal as Albu Kamal. (Feb. 24, 2017)

MOSUL, Iraq—raq's air force on Friday carried out its first-ever strikes against Islamic State in neighboring Syria, the country's Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi said, marking a dramatic escalation in its effort to roll back the insurgency by pounding a sanctuary across the border.

The attack on foreign territory, even as Iraqi security forces at home slug it out with militants to retake western Mosul, shows how the Iraqi government is shifting its focus to an Islamic State that no longer has a major stronghold within the country.

"We are determined to chase terrorism, which tries to kill our sons and people, any place it exists," Mr. Abadi said.

Mr. Abadi ordered the strikes across the border after Iraqi military and intelligence officials traced recent Baghdad car bombings to planners in villages in Syria. The attacks followed coordination with the government in Damascus, according to Iraqi officials.

"This is the first time the Iraqi air force conducted airstrikes in Syrian lands," an Iraqi air force official said, adding that Iraqi F-16 jets made the strikes. "And for sure it was based on coordination with the Syrian side," he said.

Syria's information ministry didn't immediately respond to requests for comment on the airstrikes, which targeted the villages of Husaiba and Abu Kamal just inside the Syrian border. U.S. defense officials didn't respond to a request for comment.

"The most significant aspect of that strike is that it demonstrates that ISIS' center of gravity has shifted from Mosul to the Syrian-Iraqi border area," said Nicholas Heras, a Middle East research associate at the Center for a New American Security, a security think tank in Washington, using another name for Islamic State. "It's the Iraqi government saying, ‘ook, we've got ISIS on the back leg, ISIS is going to fall.'"

The government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is also likely eager to see Iraqis step up their campaign against Islamic State in the Syrian border regions because Mr. Assad's military can use those extra resources, Mr. Heras said.

"It is to Assad's benefit for Baghdad to take a much more proactive role in striking ISIS in that border area," Mr. Heras said, adding that it allows the Syrian president to be able to say he is working with other countries. That could help burnish his regime's image, which has been severely tarnished by a large number of reported human-rights abuses, including using chemical weapons against civilians. "It also allows Assad to say he's taking part in a coalition," he added.

Mr. Abadi's aggressive, new air tactics come as Iraqi ground forces push on the west side of Mosul to retake Iraq's second-largest city from the militants. After recently taking the east side of Mosul back from Islamic State—nd several Iraqi cities last year—raq's armed forces aim to deprive the extremist group any claim to a caliphate inside its country.

Iraq's security forces, preoccupied with fighting Islamic State, say their immediate mission is to eradicate the extremist group's remaining strongholds. "We do not care anymore if the threat is in Syria or anywhere else," said Brig. Gen. Tahseen al-Khafaji, a defense ministry spokesman. "Anything that threatens our security or future or our soil will be attacked."

On Friday, defense officials declared the Mosul airport and an adjacent military compound completely under Iraqi government control as forces pushed north to the old, dense neighborhoods of the city where combat is expected to become increasingly difficult.

As Islamic State loses territory in Iraq, it has picked up the pace of terror attacks elsewhere in the country. Residents of Baghdad endure the constant threat of suicide bombs and recently the capital has seen days where dozens die and are wounded by several bombs. Last week, a series of bombings in the capital left more than 100 dead or injured in one day, with one car bomb killing more than 50. Last year, a truck bomb killed some 300 people at a shopping complex during Ramadan.

That security situation has given Mr. Abadi's critics, including the anti-American cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, reason to stage mass demonstrations in the capital demanding tougher measures from Mr. Abadi.

Mr. Sadr poses a significant and unpredictable challenge to the government. Last year, he marshaled supporters to protest government corruption and his followers stormed the Green Zone, a fortified government and diplomatic enclave, and they occupied Parliament for a short period. Earlier this month, another mass protest ended in a handful of deaths of police and his supporters.

Meanwhile, the threat of Islamic State endures, especially in the desert land straddling the Syrian-Iraq border, where militants have applied pressure for years and where Islamic State came of age before sweeping into Mosul in 2014.

Extinguishing those threats will be a challenge for Iraq's taxed security forces, who are now waging a war in a sectarian tinderbox. Mosul has become a central hub around which armed forces from a variety of backgrounds vie for power: Kurd, Sunni Arab, Shiite Arab, Christian and others.

Sunni-majority areas such as Ramadi, Fallujah and even Mosul are chafing under the Shiite-led central government. Many residents of those places say such grumblings had similar potency two years ago, allowing Islamic State to sweep in with either support from or indifference of locals. Now, new resentments are dampening excitement of being freed from Islamic State's domination.

"No money at all has been allocated to the municipality," said Abdul Sattar al-Habbu, head of Mosul's public works who said water pipes and electric distribution had been ruined, and garbage collection disrupted. "If things keep like this, we will see another Daesh," he said, using another name for Islamic State.

The defeat of Islamic State and a renewed effort to protect the homeland, could play well for Mr. Abadi, whose political fortunes have waned recently and who is navigating a shifting balance of power in the Middle East as Russia asserts itself, Iran attempts to project influence and U.S. President Donald Trump threatens to upend a number of existing relationships.

"There is one important issue to keep in mind," the defense ministry's Gen. Khafaji said. "There is an Iraqi, Syrian, Russian and Iranian coalition. This coalition is working now and part of its duty is to face terrorism. So these four countries share information just to eliminate terrorism."

A U.S.-led coalition helps Iraqi troops with precision airstrikes and military advisers on the ground, and under President Trump, have begun to work with Iraqi counterparts closer to the front lines than under operational rules laid out during former President Barack Obama's time in office.

Noam Raydan in Beirut, Awadh Altaie in Mosul and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170224ed2o007n1
