‘ Was There’
Times Insider
Reporting on Airstrikes, the ‘ingle Biggest Recruiting Tool’

By STEPHEN FARRELL 
803 words
10 May 2017
14:25
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When American Tomahawk missiles slammed into the airfield from which Syria’ President Bashar al-Assad launched chemical weapons against his own people, it was a new twist in the seemingly endless Syrian civil war.

New, at least in this conflict —nd new to the neophyte administration of President Trump. But by no means was it new to those familiar with interventions by the United States and its Western allies into other conflicts across the Middle East and South Asia.

Few have witnessed those conflicts more closely than Rod Nordland, the international correspondent at large and Kabul, Afghanistan, bureau chief for The New York Times, who has worked as a reporter in more than 150 countries and conflict locales including Baghdad, Cairo and Beirut.

Back in the mid-1980s the 16-inch guns of the battleship New Jersey bombarded Druze and Syrian gun batteries in Lebanon as America was drawn into that country’ own protracted civil war. In 2001, after Sept. 11, airstrikes helped to break the Taliban’ stranglehold on Afghanistan, allowing the Afghan military, helped by American special forces on the ground, to take city after city and eventually the capital, Kabul. In 2003, nightly bombing raids on Iraq helped to topple Saddam Hussein’ regime, allowing United States soldiers and Marines to enter Baghdad just three weeks after the war began.

But toppling regimes, taking cities or stopping large-scale insurgent attacks on a city or a military position is one thing. Holding onto cities and countries in the face of insurgent attacks is another, especially when the very airstrikes that prove so effective in the initial phase of the war becomes a liability in the aftermath because they kill civilians as well as combatants.

Speaking in the latest episode of The Times’ live interactive video series “ Was There,”r. Nordland said that civilian casualties, and the deaths of allies during errant airstrikes, were a huge negative factor.

“ think both in Iraq and Afghanistan it’ been the single biggest recruiting tool, death through airstrikes especially, for the Taliban and for Al Qaeda and its allied groups in Iraq,”e said.

“irstrikes have almost never succeeded, especially against irregular forces, or with very limited objectives. I can think of one case where they succeeded, against Milosevic in Serbia, but even that is debatable, the Russians withdrew support.”

Taking the recent strike against Syria as an example of their limited effectiveness, he said that 59 Cruise missiles was a “uge amount of ordnance, more than $50 million worth.”et the outcome was that it “illed possibly four people, who may or may not have been civilians.”

Mr. Nordland took questions from viewers during the Facebook Live interview. He was unable to answer all of them, but here are two of his replies to queries about the broader political and military engagement of the United States in the Middle East and South Asia.

Marjorie Rose asked what would happen if there were to be a “otal withdrawal by the U.S. and allied forces”rom the region.

He replied: “fghanistan would become a Taliban state again in a fairly short time, or at the very least the Taliban would reconquer large parts of the country. ISIS would probably roll back Iraqi forces from Mosul and might even threaten Baghdad again, and ISIS would be expanding rather than shrinking in Syria, as it is now. The Damascus regime would be less affected, since the American military role is only oriented against ISIS, and the regime is much more threatened by other opposition rebels than ISIS.”

Rina Goins asked if the recent Syrian strike “as military action as such or a publicity stunt.”

Mr. Nordland replied: “t could well be a publicity stunt to try to undercut that argument that Trump is in the Russians’ockets, and the Russians could be posturing when they claimed that they came within minutes of a confrontation with the United States —fter all, we gave them advance warning to minimize that risk.”

“hat’ clear,”e added, “s that, as a military action, it was pretty ineffective, especially when you consider bang (airport reopened next day) for buck ($59 million worth of cruise missiles).”

_____

This is the t hird installment of a series titled “ Was There,”n which we feature Times reporters, photographers and editors who have witnessed moments that shaped our era. Previous installments have featured John Noble Wilford, who reported on the moon landing, and Stephen Castle, who reported on “rexit.”

Follow Times Insider on Twitter.

In Syria, what lessons can America draw from its wars in Iraq and Afghanistan? Our Kabul bureau chief, Rod Nordland, discusses air strikes with Stephen Farrell. | By STEPHEN FARRELL and JOSEPHINE SEDGWICK 

Document NYTFEED020170510ed5a0040i
