Briefing
Donald Trump, California, N.B.A.: Your Tuesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,459 words
17 October 2017
11:29
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning. Before we begin, if you’e ever wondered how this briefing gets put together every day, your writer has the answer.

Here’ what you need to know:

How to make conservatives happy.

President Trump and Senator Mitch McConnell are trying a new approach: judges.

In a surprise display of togetherness on Monday, the two men emphasized a mutual desire to fill scores of federal court vacancies.

Our chief Washington correspondent, Carl Hulse, explains: “he courts are a longtime priority of conservative activists who have been grumbling about the failures of the Republican Congress, so a flurry of confirmations of nominees with known conservative views on cultural and government issues could quiet some complaints.”

After months of tensions, Mr. Trump and Mr. McConnell held a joint news conference in the Rose Garden. Here are some of the topics the president addressed.

While answering questions, Mr. Trump falsely asserted that his predecessors, particularly Barack Obama, hadn’ contacted the families of American troops killed in duty.

Milestone reached against ISIS.

The Syrian Democratic Forces, an American-backed militia group made up of Syrian Kurds and Arabs, said today that it had liberated the northern Syrian city of Raqqa from the Islamic State.

It’ a major blow to the militant group, which had long used the city as the de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate.

“he greatest fireworks show in the universe.”

Astronomers are excited.

It was announced on Monday that they had observed a pair of dead stars colliding, the first glimpse of the violent process by which most of the gold and silver in the universe was created.

“ can’ think of a similar situation in the field of science in my lifetime, where a single event provides so many staggering insights about our universe,”n astrophysicist at the University of Chicago said.

We have a video to explain it all , and answer some questions about the discovery.

After disasters, dangers remain.

One of our reporters, Caitlin Dickerson, visited a remote village in Puerto Rico devastated by Hurricane Maria.

Residents, she said, “ere quick to point out that other Puerto Ricans were living in worse circumstances, though it was hard to imagine whom they could have been talking about.”

And in California, the wildfires are far from over, but officials are confronting the next challenge: the huge amount of debris and ash that will be left behind.

“ust think of all the hazardous materials in your house,”he chief public health officer in Napa County said. “our chemicals, your pesticides, propane, gasoline, plastic and paint —t all burns down into the ash.”

#MeToo.

In the past two weeks, more than 30 women have accused the Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein of sexual misconduct.

There has been an outpouring on social media of stories of sexual harassment, punctuated by the hashtag #MeToo.

Nina Jacobson, a film producer, predicted a change in the entertainment industry: “ think the floodgates being opened is something that had to happen, and that finally brings a subject to the surface that has sort of gone unchecked for countless years.”

“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the guilty plea by Sgt. Bowe Bergdahl.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•he health care industry is the job engine of many parts of the U.S., aided by funding as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

We visited a county in Arkansas where health care accounts for one in four jobs.

•ome airlines have begun offering free meals in coach on selected U.S. flights.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ristine environments for children can  contribute to allergies and asthma.

• ough workout? Try these five things to speed up recovery.

•ecipe of the day: This pumpkin Bundt cake with a maple brown-butter glaze is full of fall spices.

Noteworthy

•iking in New York City.

In today’ 360 video, ride through the busy streets of a city that has spent millions to improve safety for cyclists.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Writers from across the political spectrum discuss the state of the Republican Party.

•hey’e cute now, but then they grow up…

No matter how you raise a wolf, you can’ turn it into a dog. Scientists are trying to determine why.

•asketball is back.

The N.B.A. tips off its 72nd season tonight. We have previews of the Eastern and Western conferences.

Our new basketball columnist, Marc Stein, has covered the league for more than 20 years and says he’ never seen a more overwhelming favorite to win the championship than the Golden State Warriors.

•est of late-night TV.

Kicking off a week of shows from Brooklyn, Jimmy Kimmel took a jab at its reputation for liberal pretension: “ll of the jokes you will hear tonight were written in small batches, by hand, on biodegradable hemp parchment, using natural ink that was made from sustainably harvested lingonberries.”

And  we spoke to Mr. Kimmel about his new visibility after he addressed the news in personal terms.

•uotation of the day.

“hey may have made a miscalculation of historic proportions by proceeding with the referendum over the objections of just about everyone who counts.”

—Joost Hiltermann, an analyst with the International Crisis Group, on the fallout from the Kurdish independence vote. On Monday, the Iraqi government carried out a military assault to wrest territory from separatists.

Back Story

The Man Booker Prize, which honors the best novel written in English and published in Britain, will be announced today.

On this year’ shortlist: “4 3 2 1,”y Paul Auster; “History of Wolves,”y Emily Fridlund; “Exit West,”y Mohsin Hamid; “Autumn,”y Ali Smith; “Lincoln in the Bardo,”y George Saunders; and “Elmet,”y Fiona Mozley.

First awarded in 1969, the Booker McConnell Prize was named for the multinational company that established it, as an effort to rival the Prix Goncourt in France. In 2002, sponsorship passed to the Man Group, an investment management firm, which added its name to the title.

The award was initially open only to writers from Britain, Ireland, Zimbabwe and the Commonwealth. Eligibility expanded in 2014 to include any English-language novelist, raising concerns that it would become dominated by Americans. (Since then, one U.S. novel —Paul Beatty’ “he Sellout”—as won. Half of the authors on this year’ shortlist are Americans.)

Winners receive 50,000 pounds, or about $66,000. Howard Jacobson, who won in 2010 for “The Finkler Question,”told The Guardian that he was going to spend the prize money on his wife: “ave you seen the price of handbags?”

Sara Aridi contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated all morning. Browse past briefings here.

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can get the briefing delivered to your inbox Sunday through Friday. We have four global editions, timed for the Americas, Europe, Asia and Australia. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Using an improvised pulley system to transport supplies over the river at Charco Abajo, P.R. Three weeks after Hurricane Maria, damaged infrastructure is hampering the delivery of aid to remote communities in Puerto Rico. | Dennis M. Rivera Pichardo for The New York Times | President Trump and Senator Mitch McConnell at the White House on Monday. | Tom Brenner/The New York Times | A classic showstopper. | Jim Wilson/The New York Times | Wolf pups at play. Researchers are looking at DNA for the answer to the differences between wolves and dogs. | Renaud Philippe for The New York Times | One of these authors will win the Man Booker Prize today. Clockwise, from top left: Paul Auster, Emily Fridlund, Mohsin Hamid, Ali Smith, George Saunders, and Fiona Mozley. | Clockwise, from top left: Lotte Hansen; Weidenfeld & Nicolson; Hamish Hamilton; Sarah Wood; Bloomsbury Publishing and JM Originals | For the first time, astronomers have seen and heard a pair of neutron stars collide in a crucible of cosmic alchemy. | By DENNIS OVERBYE, JONATHAN CORUM and JASON DRAKEFORD | The city of New York has spent millions on improving bicycle safety, but a recent study that monitored cyclists’rainwaves while biking highlighted the dangers that still exist. | By TAYLOR NAKAGAWA, SAMANTHA QUICK and NATHAN GRIFFITHS 

Document NYTFEED020171017edah001up
