World; Asia Pacific
Hours After Fires, 36 Bodies Are Found at Manila Casino

By FELIPE VILLAMOR and RUSSELL GOLDMAN 
1,287 words
1 June 2017
19:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA —hirty-six bodies were found at the biggest hotel-casino in the Philippines after a gunman set fires and touched off a mass panic —nd hours after the authorities said that only the assailant had died.

The discovery of the bodies was confirmed about noon on Friday by Oscar Albayakde, a police spokesman. Another police official, Tomas Apolonio Jr. said that the victims died of smoke inhalation.

But in the early hours of Friday, Ronald dela Rosa, the director general of the national police, said “e’e cleared everything”nd “s of now the situation is going back to normal.”

Stephen Reilly, chief operating officer of Resorts World Manila, said all guests had been accounted for and were safe. The authorities said not say why it took so long for so many bodies to be found, and what had gone wrong in the investigation.

At least one employee of the casino hotel, however, appeared to be missing in the early hours after plumes of smoke had been seen pouring out of the hotel.

“here is my daughter? I haven’ heard from her. Where is she?”il Emyongco, the father of Hazel Emyongco, a 29-year-old table supervisor, asked the police and witnesses gathered outside. He said he had been waiting for her to exit for more than five hours, but had yet to see her.

When the police first rushed to the hotel, there were fears that it was under a terrorist attack. But the authorities said later that the gunman was not a terrorist.

“pparently he’ mentally disturbed,”r. Albayalde said. “hat’ why we cannot relate it to terrorism, because he didn’ shoot anyone. He just went inside, burned the dining tables, shot at the door knob”f a storage room where chips are kept. Mr. Albayalde said the gunman stole a large quantity of casino chips.

The police spokesman said of the gunman, “e’ big, and he’ white,”nd was speaking English.

Patrons jumped off balconies and fled as police officers with bomb-sniffing dogs searched Resorts World Manila complex for armed attackers early Friday. At least two dozen people were reported hurt in their rush to escape.

Hours later, the police and hotel officials said initial reports and rumors that Islamic State gunmen had invaded and set fire to the hotel casino were false, and that one man —ossibly an irate gambler with a rifle and can of gasoline —ad shot a television and set a table ablaze.

Mr. ela Rosa, director general of the national police, said his officers exchanged fire with the gunman early Friday as he hid inside the hotel. The gunman was found dead.

Mr. dela Rosa also said it was clear he was not a terrorist and instead possibly a “ore loser.”

Mr. dela Rosa’ description punctuated a cascade of confusing and sometimes contradictory accounts of what had unfolded at the casino hotel in the Pasay City neighborhood of the Philippine capital, just across from the international airport, starting just after midnight.

It came against the backdrop of a nation on edge because of a resurgent Islamist militant insurgency in the south, where President Rodrigo Duterte declared martial law last week and said terrorist attacks were a possibility.

The police sealed off the area and the casino hotel was placed in lockdown as officers searched the complex.

Pleas by the police not to spread rumors via social media appeared to go largely ignored.

Mr. dela Rosa told reporters the terrorism angle made no sense considering the gunman’ behavior.

“n fact, he passed by people,”he chief said describing video recordings of the gunman taken inside. “e didn’ mind them. He was carrying a liter of gasoline, set the table on fire. Maybe he’ mad at gambling. Why did he steal the chips? Maybe he’ a sore loser.”

“t’ too early to tell, but so far as far as we are concerned there was no indication that it was ISIS,”dded Mr. dela Rosa, using an acronym for the Islamic State. “f he were, he would have mowed down those gambling or exploded a bomb.”

Another woman, who fled the casino hotel hours after the ordeal began, passed out on the sidewalk soon after making it outside.

At least 25 people were injured and taken to hospitals, a spokesman for the Pasay Chapter of the Philippine Red Cross was quoted as saying by The Manila Times. Some of the wounded were injured jumping from the hotel’ second-floor balconies to escape, the spokesman, Fernando Atienza, was quoted as saying.

WATCH: Mga sugatan, nirespondehan agad ng medical team. Ayon sa kanila, tumalon lang sila para makalabas ng gusali. pic.twitter.com/T7Y9Dpw0Cj —ZBB Super Radyo (@dzbb) June 1, 2017

“any people were running out of the resort,”aid Manuel Reyes, 25, an employee at the nearby Remington Hotel. “here were also gunshots fired. We thought that it was ordinary crime. But we are hearing from the responding policemen that armed men attacked the hotel.”

Mr. Reyes said he had helped two women run from the hotel, before going back to assist an older man.

“he man told me, ‘lease help. There are many armed men inside.’t that point I realized it was more than just an ordinary emergency.”

In a statement, Kim Molitas, a spokeswoman for the National Capitol Regional Police, implored residents not to share information about the casino hotel on social media, asking locals to “elp keep people inside Resorts World and our police safe.”

Although there was no confirmation of who was behind the attack, President Trump described it as an act of terrorism.

“t’ really very sad about what’ going on throughout the world with terror,”r. Trump said at the start of his news conference at the White House on withdrawing the United States from the Paris climate-change agreement.

Rita Katz, director of the Site Intelligence Group, which tracks extremist propaganda, wrote on Twitter that a Filipino operative of the Islamic State had said “one wolf soldiers”ere responsible.

Since May, the country’ military has been locked in a battle against Islamist groups allied with the Islamic State on the restive southern island of Mindanao.

That fighting has been centered on the city of Marawi, where thousands of residents have fled amid the mayhem. Clashes escalated last week between the security forces and members of the Abu Sayyaf extremist group who have aligned themselves with the Islamic State.

The military advanced into Marawi after having received reports that Isnilon Hapilon, an Abu Sayyaf leader who has declared fealty to the Islamic State, had been spotted in the area.

Felipe Villamor reported from Manila, and Russell Goldman from New York. Richard C. Paddock contributed reporting from Manila, and Megan Specia and Rick Gladstone from New York.

* Philippine Military Kills 11 of Its Soldiers in Errant Airstrike

* Catholic Priest Abducted in the Philippines Appeals to President in a Video

* Filipinos Who Fled \b ISIS\b0 -Inspired Fighting: ‘here Was Gunfire Everywhere’

* Philippine Forces Struggle to Retake City Held by Islamist Militants

* The Latest Unrest in the Southern Philippines, Explained

Evacuated employees and guests of hotels watched Friday as smoke billowed from the Resorts World building in the Pasay City neighborhood of Manila. | Erik De Castro/Reuters | Police officers outside the Resort World Manila hotel early Friday in Manila. | Ezra Acayan/European Pressphoto Agency | Tourists after being evacuated from the Resorts World building. | Erik De Castro/Reuters | Evacuated employees of a hotel near the Resorts World building. | Erik De Castro/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170601ed610063h
