World
More Manchester Bomb Victims Identified; Stories emerge of the children and adults killed or injured in the attack at a concert arena in northern England

By Denise Roland and Saabira Chaudhuri 
903 words
24 May 2017
19:31
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Marcin Klis's first name was incorrectly given as Martin in an earlier version of this article. (May 24, 2017)

One died in the blast in a way that shielded her sister and niece. Several were parents waiting to pick up their children.

Friends and family overnight confirmed the identities of more victims of the bombing that claimed 22 lives as thousands of concertgoers, including many children, streamed out of a Manchester, England, arena after watching American pop star Ariana Grande perform.

Ian Hopkins, chief constable of the Greater Manchester Police, said Wednesday afternoon that an off-duty police officer had been among those killed in the bombing. He said he wouldn't release further details at this time, based on the wishes of family members.

Kelly Brewster, a young woman from Sheffield, east of Manchester, was walking behind her sister Claire and niece Hollie when a man identified by police as Salman Abedi detonated an explosive outside Manchester Arena.

She "shielded Hollie and Claire from the damage," Ms. Brewster's uncle Paul Dryhurst told the ITV television network. The mother and daughter are in a hospital having shrapnel removed from their bodies, he added. Ms. Brewster was 32 years old, according to local media reports.

Martyn Hakan Hett, a public-relations manager reported in local media as 29, donned a beige and green button-front shirt with black shorts before heading headed to a pub on Monday to drink Prosecco with his friend Stuart Aspinall in the sunshine, according to a post on Mr. Hett's Facebook page, before heading to the Ariana Grande concert together.

Mr. Hett, who became separated from Mr. Aspinall during the last song, "Dangerous Woman," had been slated to leave for a two-month vacation to the U.S., and had spent the last few days saying goodbye to friends.

"We got the news last night that our wonderful iconic and beautiful Martyn didn't survive," a friend wrote on Twitter. "He left this world exactly how he lived, center of attention."

Friends Alison Howe and Lisa Lees were waiting outside the arena when the bomb exploded. Both women, in their 40s, were waiting for their teenage daughters, according to local media.

"They took a caring beautiful mum and stepmother away from us all," read a Facebook post from Ms. Howe's stepson, Jordan Howe. "She was amazing to us all."

Lee Hunter, Ms. Lees's brother, confirmed her death in a Facebook post late Tuesday. "For those who don't know Lisa is gone but never forgotten I love you Lisa I'll miss you so much," he wrote.

Marcin Klis, a Polish man who worked as a taxi driver in York, northern England, and his wife, Angelika, were also waiting outside the venue for their children when the blast went off.

"Two girls, one of them a grown-up, the other a teenager, were at the concert. The parents drove over after the concert to pick their daughters up," Poland's foreign minister, Witold Waszczykowski, told local radio station RMF FM on Wednesday. "The children are safe," he added.

Fifteen-year-old Olivia Campbell, from Bury north of Manchester, was also among the victims. "RIP my darling precious gorgeous girl Olivia Campbell taken far far to [sic] soon go sing with the angels and keep smiling mummy loves you so much," read a Facebook post from her mother, Charlotte, posted late Tuesday night.

Ms. Campbell, who like many relatives spent Tuesday frantically appealing for information, tearfully told CNN earlier on Tuesday how Olivia and her best friend had bought new outfits for the event. They were just "normal teenage children going to see one of their favorite artists," she said. "It's ended in absolute carnage."

Jane Tweddle-Taylor, a woman from Blackpool, England, in her early 50s, was also killed after going to the arena with a friend to collect the friend's children.

"Jane was a very, very lovely lady and a very good mother to three daughters, liked by everybody," Ms. Tweddle-Taylor's partner, Mark Taylor, told BBC Radio Lancashire as he choked back tears. The friend and children survived, he said.

A young girl, Megan Hurley, was also identified as a victim by a woman named Helen McDermott from Halewood in Liverpool, northwest England, who set up a fundraising page for the funeral.

The youngest confirmed victim, 8-year-old Saffie Rose Roussos, was named on Tuesday.

Georgina Callander, 18, a devoted fan of Ms. Grande's who had previously met the singer, and John Atkinson, a man in his late 20s, also were identified on Tuesday.

Nell Jones, a 14-year-old student at Holmes Chapel Comprehensive School in Holmes Chapel, a village southwest of Manchester, was confirmed on Wednesday as having died in the bombings. "We are all devastated by the loss and as a school community we must now come to terms with what has happened," said Denis Oliver, the school's head teacher.

Wiktor Szary contributed to this article.

Write to Denise Roland at Denise.Roland@wsj.com and Saabira Chaudhuri at saabira.chaudhuri@wsj.com

Related

* Britain Steps Up Security After Manchester Attack at Ariana Grande Concert

* Britain Raises Terror Alert Level After \b ISIS\b0  Claims Deadly Suicide Bombing

* How the Manchester Attack Unfolded

* Ariana Grande's Fans Show Solidarity With Victims

Document WSJO000020170524ed5o001md
