US
House Lawmakers Agree to Scope of Russia Investigation; Panel will look at any contacts between U.S. political campaigns and Russia, as well as sources of leaks of classified information

By Byron Tau 
498 words
2 March 2017
14:17
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

House lawmakers have come to a bipartisan agreement on the scope of a congressional probe into possible Russian interference in the 2016 U.S. presidential election.

The House Intelligence Committee said Wednesday evening that it will examine the extent of the Russian cyber activity directed at the U.S., as well as the U.S. government response to those attempted intrusions.

The panel will also look at any links between U.S. political campaigns and the Russian government, as well as the possible sources of leaks of classified information from within the U.S. government.

The agreement is a breakthrough for one of the primary investigations of the matter. The Senate Intelligence Committee is conducting its own review and the Federal Bureau of Investigation is conducting a separate criminal investigation.

The scope of the House investigation represents a compromise between Republicans and Democrats, who have each focused on different aspects of the controversy surrounding potential foreign interference in the election. A joint report from the U.S. intelligence community has concluded that Russians intervened using a combination of computer hacking and propaganda on behalf of then-candidate Donald Trump, an assertion that he has rejected.

Mr. Trump has called for an investigation into the numerous leaks of classified information surrounding the investigation since he took office in January.

Democrats have focused more on the potential links between members of Mr. Trump's campaign or senior staff who may have had contact with the Russian government or intelligence operatives.

U.S. investigators have also examined possible contacts that Attorney General Jeff Sessions had with Russian officials when he was serving as an adviser to Mr. Trump's presidential campaign, The Wall Street Journal reported this week.

The expanded scope of the probe means that it will include leaks that may have been aimed at undermining the Trump administration, such as those that led to the resignation of Mr. Trump's first national security adviser, as well as possible contact between political actors and foreign governments.

"President Trump has made it very clear that he expects the Russian government to de-escalate violence in the Ukraine and return Crimea. At the same time, he fully expects to and wants to be able to get along with Russia, unlike previous administrations, so that we can solve many problems together facing the world, such as the threat of ISIS and terrorism," White House press secretary Sean Spicer has said.

Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com

Related

* White House Dismisses Calls for Special Prosecutor to Investigate Russia Ties

* Preparations Begin for Trump-Putin Meeting

* Cracks Show in GOP Opposition to a Trump-Russia Probe

* Trump Defends Himself, Denies Links to Russia (Feb. 16)

* White House Facing More Russia Questions After Mike Flynn Resignation (Feb. 14)

Document WSJO000020170302ed320029r
