US
Trial of Accused 'Chelsea' Bomber Is Set to Begin; Prosecutors allege Ahmad Rahimi planted bombs throughout NYC and N.J.

By Nicole Hong 
709 words
1 October 2017
15:00
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors in Manhattan will seek to convince jurors this week that Ahmad Rahimi is the man who set off bombs in New York City and New Jersey last year that wounded more than two dozen people.

Mr. Rahimi, a 29-year-old U.S. citizen who was born in Afghanistan, faces mandatory life imprisonment if he is convicted of all eight charges, which include using weapons of mass destruction and bombing a place of public use.

He has pleaded not guilty.

Going to trial may have been Mr. Rahimi's best chance to avoid a possible life sentence, legal experts say. They say a guilty plea likely also would have resulted in life imprisonment.

Prosecutors accuse Mr. Rahimi, a former resident of Elizabeth, N.J., of planting bombs throughout New York City and New Jersey, including one that detonated in Manhattan's Chelsea neighborhood on the night of Sept. 17, 2016. The blast injured approximately 31 people and caused millions of dollars in property damage, according to law enforcement officials.

The explosions set off a manhunt across two states. Mr. Rahimi was captured two days later after a shootout with police in Linden, N.J.

The attack highlighted the difficulty for law enforcement in finding out when an individual is buying suspicious materials to carry out a possible terrorist attack. In the months before the incident, an eBay user with the registered username "ahmad rahimi" bought citric acid and other materials commonly used in improvised explosives, according to law enforcement.

The trial, which is expected to last at least two weeks, will feature surveillance video that officials say will tie Mr. Rahimi to the attack.

On the morning of Sept. 17 last year, the first explosive device detonated along the route of a charity 5K race in Seaside Park, N.J. before the race had begun. Later that day, a device that had been placed inside a pressure cooker packed with ball bearings and left in a dumpster blew up in Chelsea. Last week, , a federal judge granted the government's request to bring the dumpster into the courthouse as a proposed trial exhibit.

Shortly after the explosions, law enforcement found another pressure-cooker bomb a few blocks away in Chelsea. The next day, multiple explosive devices were discovered inside a backpack near an Elizabeth train station.

At the trial, expert witnesses are expected to testify that Mr. Rahimi's fingerprints were found on several of the bomb components and on materials in the backpack. The government will show jurors the contents of a notebook that Mr. Rahimi carried at the time of his arrest as evidence of his intent to commit a terrorist act, according to court filings.

The notebook contained a letter allegedly written by Mr. Rahimi to the U.S. government saying the attacks were an effort to cause "Death to Your OPPRESSION" and "Gun shots to your Police," according to court filings. The letter also references Osama bin Laden and other terrorists.

Mr. Rahimi intended for years to "engage in violent jihad motivated by propaganda and other directives from terrorist leaders," prosecutors wrote in a filing.

Mr. Rahimi's court-appointed lawyers will likely try to undermine the government's claim that the notebook belonged to Mr. Rahimi, saying in a court filing that "the government has not offered proof of authorship."

The defense may also challenge evidence from Mr. Rahimi's laptop on First Amendment grounds. Prosecutors are expected to show emails from Mr. Rahimi that contain information about jihad, as well as his internet searches for propaganda magazines from terrorist groups like Islamic State, or ISIS.

In a court filing, the defense wrote that many of the electronic communications occurred in 2012, years before the attack, and that sending links to articles about jihad does not point to a "serious expression of an intention to use a weapon of mass destruction." His lawyers said he engaged in "lawful speech, no matter how unpopular."

Write to Nicole Hong at nicole.hong@wsj.com

Related

* Chelsea, After the Bombing: Cleaned Up, Moved On

* Benghazi Suspect's Trial to Begin

Document WSJO000020171001eda1000ma
