World; Middle East
Iranian Kurds Are Implicated in Terrorist Attacks in Tehran

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
1,143 words
9 June 2017
20:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN —he Iranian authorities arrested 41 people Friday in connection with the twin terror attacks this week, the semiofficial Fars news agency reported, as evidence mounted that Iranian Kurds affiliated with the Islamic State extremist group had carried out the assault.

The men who made their way through the Parliament building on Wednesday, shooting assault rifles, throwing grenades and searching for a way into the main hall, were probably Iranian Kurds, security sources say, though only one —n Iranian Kurd —as been identified. The two people who attacked a shrine are understood to be an Iranian-Kurd and a man whose background is unknown, the security sources said.

The man identified by the Ministry of Intelligence, Serias Sadeghi, is a Kurdish Iranian from the city of Paveh in western Iran near the Iraqi border. In 2014, the Democratic Party of Kurdistan Iran, an opposition party, published a report about increasing Islamic State activities in Iranian Kurdistan that singled out Mr. Sadeghi as a prominent recruiter who, at times, held sessions in a local mosque.

One website, KhabarDena.Ir, on Friday quoted a community leader from Paveh, Mamusta Molla Ghader Ghaderi, as saying that some of the attackers were from Paveh. A video posted on the \b ISIS\b0  media channel Amaq News on Thursday shows a group of five men, with their leader, possibly Mr. Sadeghi, dressed in black with his face covered by a mask, speaking in both Arabic and Kurdish, claiming responsibility for the attacks.

“his is a message from the soldiers of Islamic State in Iran, soldiers of the first brigade of Islamic State in Iran which, God willing, won’ be the last,”he man says. “his brigade will mark the start of jihad in Iran, and we call on our Muslim brothers to join us.”

He concluded his message with a threat to Saudi Arabia, saying that it, too, will be targeted.

Publicly, the Iranian leadership has sought to cast blame for the attacks on its favorite targets: Saudi Arabia, the United States and Israel. The assaults “ill only increase hatred for the governments of the United States and their stooges in the region like the Saudis,”ran’ supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, said.

While evidence that this week’ attacks were carried out by Iranian Kurds is becoming irrefutable, the Iranian authorities are typically reluctant to admit to having homegrown terrorists or to reveal their ethnic backgrounds. Both would indicate a degree of instability and tensions that the Iranian leadership would rather not acknowledge. The fact that the attackers are in all likelihood Iranian Kurds, Sunnis from inside the country, is a source of concern, one analyst said.

“he border towns and villages and tribes along Iran’ East, West and Southern borders are poor and vulnerable to extremism,”aid Mashallah Shamsolvaezin, an Arabic affairs analyst. “oung unemployed men can be wooed and recruited.”

Scanners, body checks and heavily armed soldiers or police have been rare sights in Tehran, which has seemingly been immune in recent years to the terror attacks plaguing much of the Middle East and Europe.

But on Friday, two days after the attacks at the city’ landmark Parliament building and the golden, domed mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, the founder of the Islamic Republic, heavily armed police and soldiers were everywhere.

Three members of Iran’ Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps stood at every metro station entrance, checking bags and keeping an eye out for suspicious people. Plainclothes agents, recognizable by their government issued walkie-talkies, paced up and down the streets, stopping anyone who looked out of the ordinary.

For average Iranians, the initial shock had largely faded into mourning. “’ just so sad,”aid Hamed Heidari, 28, who said he had come to pay his respects at a tribute in the Parliament to the 16 people who died there in the attack.

Like a number of others who had gathered there, he could not get in. Security was tight, and only those on lists were allowed in to participate in the ceremony inside the building. Mr. Heidari, who said he made handicrafts for a living, waited outside in the hot summer sun, along with dozens of others. “e just never thought something like that could happen here.”

Just behind him, several windows in the Parliament that had been shot out remained as evidence of the prolonged firefight between the three attackers and the security forces. “t was right in the middle of Ramadan, Mr. Heidari said. “hat Muslim would do such a thing?”

A Muslim with the Islamic State, apparently. The extremist group issues yearly exhortations to its members to instigate attacks during Ramadan against its enemies in Europe and in the Middle East.

During the weekly Friday prayers, worshipers shouted “eath to Saudi Arabia”nd “eath the United States, Britain, and Israel.”ne speaker, a moderator who leads the crowds in chanting slogans, also blamed the United States and Saudi Arabia.

“merica and Saudi Arabia could not get anything from their proxy wars, so they decided to bring the war here, inside Iran,”e said. “hese terrorists are the byproducts of the arrogant powers,”he Friday prayer leader, Kazem Sadigi, said later. In Iran’ revolutionary language, “he arrogant powers”efers to the United States and its allies.

Outside of the Friday prayer venue, on Tehran’ Enghelab, or revolution street, mourners gathered around trucks using trailers to carry the coffins of some of those who died in the attack on Wednesday. One carried three coffins with three names: Ali Toudehfallah, Ali Gholizadeh and Reza Sabeti.

The trailers were decorated with flowers and wreaths. One had a banner reading “eath to America”nd “eath to Israel”n its grill. An angry man slammed the banner, shouting “amn you!”

A military band sat in the sweltering sun on chairs, also on top of a trailer, waiting for the procession to start driving through downtown Tehran.

Along the route two women were waiting to pay their final respects to a colleague, who was shot dead while in a waiting room outside the main hall of the Parliament. The victim, Hanieh Akbarian, 37, who taught adults to read and write, had come to Tehran to ask her local lawmaker to help her with insurance. She was among the first people killed.

“he just loved her job, helping people, teaching them to read,”aid Faezeh Mirzaei. “ can’ believe she is dead,”aid her friend, Firouzeh Naghdizadeh. They held up a banner they had made for Ms. Akbarian. It read, in formal Persian: “e send our condolences for this painful death.”

Mourners attended a funeral in Tehran on Friday for some of the victims of two attacks by terrorists aligned with the Islamic State. | Ebrahim Noroozi/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170609ed690048v
