World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,041 words
23 August 2017
13:27
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Big Oil, Big Change

A dramatic shift is under way at big oil companies as they adapt to a prolonged period of lower prices brought about by the U.S. shale boom. While they once favored swashbuckling leaders who bet billions on megamergers and pricey projects in far-flung regions, many oil companies are now turning to executives adept at squeezing every last dollar from a barrel through refining, and shorter-term investments that turn a profit faster. In the latest leadership news, we report that Chevron Chief Executive John Watson is planning to step down. The transition is expected to be announced next month, although Mr. Watson's successor hasn't yet been finalized by the board. The leading candidate to succeed Mr. Watson, 60, is Michael Wirth, 56, a refining specialist who earlier this year was elevated to the position of vice chairman.

Pressure on Pakistan

The Trump administration on Tuesday outlined steps it is prepared to take to raise pressure on Pakistan to stop harboring extremist groups, including sanctions on government officials, ramping up U.S. drone strikes in the country, and further cutting aid. The effort—he latest in a series of start-and-stop U.S. campaigns to influence Pakistan dating to the Sept. 11 attacks—omes as a centerpiece of a new strategy encompassing Afghanistan and South Asia, including expanding the U.S. military presence in Afghanistan. But experts and former officials with experience in the region question whether it will be any more successful than its forerunners, and Pakistani officials already are chafing under new U.S. demands that come without the recognition they want of Islamabad's past efforts. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said Pakistan's status as a major non-NATO ally of the U.S. could be "put on the table."

The Long Game

After years of waiting for interest rates to rise, some banks are lending as if that day will never come, loading up on a record amount of loans and securities that carry low rates for long periods. The percentage of bank assets that won't mature or change rates for more than five years reached a new high in the second quarter, according to new FDIC data. Much of this lending for longer is in the booming area of commercial real estate, where borrowers finance offices and apartment buildings typically with loans that have fixed-rate periods from three to 10 years. By locking in longer terms for loans at lower rates, banks could face a profit squeeze if they have to raise deposit rates sharply in the future.

Second Impression

It's a moment few can avoid: You meet someone you want to impress but wind up starting with a glaring faux pas. That tone-deaf comment to a prospective boss or spilled coffee all over a customer can wreck everything. First impressions are rooted in biased thought patterns, including the primacy effect—he tendency for the first few things people notice about someone to influence how they interpret information later. It's possible to recover from a bad first take, but it takes time, effort and some nuanced skills. Offering lots of evidence to counter a bad start can help, as can spending a lot of facetime with someone to repair the relationship. A little self-deprecating humor can show you take your mistake seriously—nd that you're human.

Today's Video

Push Back

How disruptive are push notifications? Just watch Joanna Stern bring them into the real world. Fortunately, she also provides some tips for controlling the pesky on-screen pop-ups.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Companies Promote Corporate Tax Overhaul

From Ailing to Artisanal: The Transformation of a Cincinnati Neighborhood

WORLD

U.S. Treasury Sanctions Chinese, Russian Firms for Aiding North Korea

U.S. Weighs Restricting Trades in Venezuelan Debt to Punish Maduro

BUSINESS

WPP Shares Plunge on Lower Growth Forecast

'Serious Doubts' Over Bayer and Monsanto's $57 Billion Megadeal, Says EU

MARKETS

Blackstone Considers Initial Public Offering of Gates Corp.

Why the ECB Can't Catch a Break on the Euro

Number of the Day

15%

The percent that four mutual-fund companies have marked down their investments in Uber. The first of such price cuts suggest these investors are souring on the ride-hailing giant following a scandal-ridden year.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, have you ever had to overcome a bad first impression? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on President Trump's new Afghanistan strategy, Stephen Beekman of New Jersey said: "Have we forgotten that the British, then the Russians, tried and failed to make a difference? What we need is better coordination of security providers on the European, American (both), Australian and Asian continents!" Jim Pierce of Texas commented: "If nothing else, the president's speech reflects the fact that he has surrounded himself with sage advisers. The question is, how long will it take for him to contradict or refute himself through some inane tweet?" And Mark Koesters of Ohio wrote: "Pulling our troops from Iraq led to the rapid rise of ISIS; we can't allow that to happen in Afghanistan. U.S. troops have been in Japan, Germany, and South Korea for decades as an effective deterrent, and the same can be true in Afghanistan."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170823ed8n001up
