Man Accused of Trying to Join  ISIS 

By Corinne Ramey 
405 words
6 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A10B
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors accused a Long Island man of attempting to provide material support to terrorists, according to a complaint unsealedover the weekend.

Prosecutors said Elvis Redzepagic, 26 years old, traveled twice to the Middle East and made attempts to join Islamic State and the Nusra Front, al Qaeda's Syrian affiliate.

Mr. Redzepagic appeared in U.S. District Court in Brooklyn on Saturday. Federal agents arrested him at his home in Commack, N.Y., the day before, authorities said.

"This defendant made numerous attempts to travel to Syria to wage violent jihad," Brooklyn U.S. Attorney Robert Capers said in a statement. "We will continue to track down and prosecute individuals like the defendant before they are able to become foreign fighters or harm the United States and its allies."

Mildred Whalen, a lawyer for Mr. Redzepagic, said her client had been fully cooperative with law enforcement. "We will be working with his family in the hope that the court and the government will see that what he needs is counseling and support, not imprisonment," Ms. Whalen said.

Mr. Redzepagic, a U.S. citizen, traveled to Turkey in July 2015 because he wanted to join his cousin, who he believed was the commander of a battalion in Syria, according to the complaint.Mr. Redzepagic wasn't able to cross the border from Turkey to Syria so he left the country, the complaint says. He told law-enforcement officials that when he tried to enter Syria, "he was prepared to strap a bomb on and sacrifice himself for jihad," according to the complaint.

In October 2015, Mr. Redzepagic sent messages from his Facebook account, writing, according to the complaint: "since i got back from turkey from trying to perform Jihad and join Jabhat Al Nusra the cia has been bothering me" and "Its annoying but i out smarted them."

In August 2016, he traveled to Jordan to cross into Syria, but Jordanian officials sent him back to the U.S., the complaint says.

Mr. Redzepagic was arrested by Suffolk County police officers in early February on a violation, according to the complaint. It says he voluntarily participated in interviews with law-enforcement officials, including providing his laptop and cellphone to investigators.

His attorney requested a bail hearing in federal court in Central Islipon Monday, a court spokesman said.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170306ed360001v
