US
U.S. Bomb Dropped on  ISIS  Tunnels in Afghanistan Built for Combat and as Psychological Deterrent; Weapon was pushed through production and tested during run-up to Iraq War

By Ben Kesling 
542 words
14 April 2017
01:59
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The mother of all bombs was intended to be used in combat, but it was also designed just to sit there. The mere existence of the 21,600-pound weapon was supposed to serve as a psychological weapon, its sheer size acting to deter U.S. enemies.

The GBU-43 made its debut in 2003 during the run-up to the Iraq War as the George W. Bush administration looked for ways to persuade Iraqi President Saddam Hussein to disarm voluntarily, while warning him of the threat of war. The bomb, known as the MOAB, or Massive Ordnance Air Blast, was pushed through production and tested as U.S. troops were on the verge of invading.

"There is a psychological component to all aspects of warfare," Donald Rumsfeld, then-secretary of Defense, said when asked by reporters about the weapon just days before the start of the war. "The goal is to not have a war."

When asked about the size of the weapon he replied: "This is not small."

The next day, the Iraqi ambassador to Russia, Abbas Khalaf Kunfuth, publicly criticized Mr. Rumsfeld.

"You will certainly have heard the U.S. Defense Secretary Rumsfeld…raising a new bomb called the mother of all bombs," the ambassador said. "And he was not ashamed to speak about it, to threaten a small country such as Iraq and displaying his nature of an American cowboy who knows no limits and has no morals."

The U.S. never dropped the MOAB during the ensuing conflict. Brig. Gen. Vincent Brooks told reporters soon after the launch of the war tactical considerations dictate the use of weapons, and no appropriate situation had arisen.

The weapon made its combat debut Thursday in eastern Afghanistan, becoming the largest nonnuclear bomb ever used on the enemy by U.S. forces, according to Ann Stefanek, an Air Force spokeswoman. The largest nonnuclear bomb in the arsenal has yet to be used in combat.

The MOAB is designed to explode in the air over a target, and doesn't penetrate into the ground before exploding. The Massive Ordnance Penetrator—he largest nonnuclear weapon in the arsenal—s designed to burrow into the ground on impact before detonating.

The MOAB replaced the BLU-82, known as the "Daisy Cutter," a 15,000-pound bomb which "could instantly clear jungles for helicopter landing zones in Vietnam," according to the Air Force.

The MOAB was rushed through production at the Air Force Research Laboratory and built from existing parts, so the cost isn't really known, said Ms. Stefanek.

A major difference between the Daisy Cutter and the MOAB is the addition of satellite guidance to enhance accuracy, along with the addition of a few thousand pounds of explosives.

"The most amazing thing about MOAB is it's the most powerful bomb ever built and has done its job—eterring the enemy—imply because they know about it," Robert Hammack, a team chief at the Air Force lab, said in 2008.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d00c9p
