World News:  ISIS  Bombs Kill Dozens In Two Egypt Churches --- Worshipers on Coptic Christian Palm Sunday had packed churches in Tanta, Alexandria

By Dahlia Kholaif in Cairo and Tamer El-Ghobashy in Erbil, Iraq 
677 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Twin blasts claimed by Islamic State struck Egyptian churches during Palm Sunday services, killing at least 47 people in an escalating campaign of terrorism against the country's Christian population.

The attacks raise fresh questions about the ability of President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi's government to protect the minority group, and come just weeks ahead of an expected first visit to Egypt by Pope Francis.

The first explosion targeted the Mar Girgis Church in the Nile Delta city of Tanta, some 60 miles north of Cairo, as worshipers attended morning services. Security officials said an assailant planted a bomb under a seat in the main hall.

The ensuing blast killed 29 people and wounded another 69, a health ministry official told state media. Footage aired on state television showed bloodstains on the floor of the church hall, shattered furniture and bloodied palm fronds as victims and survivors wailed in shock and grief.

Shortly afterward, a suicide bomber attempted to enter Saint Mark's Orthodox Cathedral in the center of the coastal city of Alexandria, blowing himself up at the entrance after being stopped by police, the interior ministry said.

The cathedral is a landmark in the city and had been the historic seat of the Coptic Pope.

Surveillance videos broadcast on Egyptian networks showed the purported bomber -- wearing a jacket and with a bright blue garment draped around his shoulders -- approaching an open church gate before being directed to a nearby metal detector. Pausing in front of the metal detector, he triggered the blast as two female police officers stood nearby.

The incident took place as Pope Tawadros, the head of the Coptic church, led a Palm Sunday service. He was unharmed but at least 18 people were killed and 40 others wounded, the interior ministry said.

Three of the dead were police officers, including one who physically prevented the bomber from entering, according to the interior ministry. A second bomb was later discovered and defused by officers on the cathedral grounds, the ministry said.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attacks but offered no further details, in a brief statement by Amaq, its official media arm. In a later statement, it described the attackers as a "covert cell."

Prime Minister Sherif Ismail said he had telephoned Pope Tawadros to offer condolences, and vowed to bring the planners of the attacks to justice.

Tanta's provincial security chief, Hossam Khalifa, was fired Sunday after reports emerged that a bomb had been found and defused at the same church last month, according to state newspaper Al Ahram. The interior ministry said in a statement that Mr. Khalifa had been reassigned, along with another senior officer.

Egypt's Al-Azhar, the highest Sunni Muslim Islamic authority, condemned the bombings, as did Pope Francis and other Middle Eastern and European nations.

President Donald Trump posted two tweets condemning the attacks and expressed confidence in Mr. Sisi. "So sad to hear of the terrorist attack in Egypt. U.S. strongly condemns. I have great. . .confidence that President Al Sisi will handle situation properly," he said.

Islamic State's Egyptian affiliate, Sinai Province, has since 2014 carried out hundreds of attacks on police and military personnel, mostly in the restive north Sinai Peninsula. It recently began targeting Egypt's Christians, who make up some 10% of the country's 92 million population and remain the largest Christian community in the Middle East.

The wave of violence has provoked rare criticism of Mr. Sisi by Copts, who said he hadn't upheld a promise to protect them made when he came to power through a 2013 military coup.

Egypt's Christians largely had supported his ascent, fearful of persecution under then-President Mohammed Morsi, a senior official of the Islamist Muslim Brotherhood and the nation's first democratically elected president.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170410ed4a0001i
