World News:  ISIS  Militants Strike in Iraqi City

By Ghassan Adnan and Isabel Coles 
338 words
28 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

BAGHDAD -- Islamic State militants attacked the western Iraqi city of Ramadi on three fronts Wednesday, clashing with security forces even as Iraq's army routs the terror group from its few remaining strongholds in the country.

The attack comes as Iraqi forces wage dual offensives to recapture western Anbar province, of which Ramadi is the capital, and the Hawija pocket in the country's north -- the last two major areas held by Islamic State, which seized around one-third of the country in a 2014 blitz.

Security officials in Ramadi said the insurgents had tricked Iraqi forces by pretending to be tribal fighters, enabling them to infiltrate parts of the city, some 55 miles west of Baghdad.

Civilians fled parts of western Ramadi after militants took over several buildings there and clashed with security forces, said police Col. Adel al-Alwani.

At least 13 Islamic State fighters, including suicide bombers, were killed in clashes with security forces in the Majar area south of the city, local official Ali Dawood said.

A photograph from clashes in a neighboring area showed members of Iraq's security forces pushing a wheelbarrow loaded with the dead bodies of at least two insurgents.

A total of 58 militants were killed in the clashes, according to the Anbar police directorate. The provincial health directorate said 16 civilians and members of the security forces were also killed.

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces in July routed the militants from the northern city of Mosul, the largest city under their control, and last month retook the symbolic insurgent bastion of Tal Afar, near the border with Syria.

Islamic State is also under pressure in that country, where a Kurdish-led militia is chipping away at its operational base, Raqqa.

As the militants lose territory, they are resorting to more conventional insurgent tactics such as bombings and hit-and-run attacks against security forces and civilians.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170928ed9s0000x
