Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Bronx Man Is Charged With Trying To Join  ISIS 

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
536 words
23 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
24
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

The Bronx man said he had quit his job and paid off his debts, all in preparation for flying to Europe and making his way to Syria to join the Islamic State, the authorities said on Thursday.

But the man, Saddam Mohamed Raishani, did not make his flight: He was arrested at Kennedy International Airport on Wednesday night, the authorities said, after passing through security and attempting to board a flight to Lisbon, from where he was to fly to Istanbul.

Mr. Raishani, 30, was charged with one count of attempting to provide material support to a terrorist organization and was detained pending further proceedings in Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Mr. Raishani, a trained nurse who once worked in a hospital and until recently worked for a home care provider, told one person that ''while it would be difficult leaving his wife and child to join the Islamic State, he knew that he was making the right choice,'' according to a criminal complaint filed by the office of Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan.

Unbeknown to Mr. Raishani, the person he was speaking to was a paid government informant who, with an undercover New York City police detective, was integral to building the case against him, the complaint says.

In January, Mr. Raishani called the informant, whom he knew, and asked to meet, which they did the next day inside the informant's car in Queens, the complaint says. They discussed the history of Islam and the informant saw an image on Mr. Raishani's cellphone of a black flag associated with the Islamic State, or ISIS.

Mr. Raishani told the informant, named only as CS, that some time ago a friend of his had left New York to join ISIS, and that he had helped the friend shop for supplies and given the friend money and a ride to Kennedy Airport, the complaint says.

Mr. Raishani told the informant that he had communicated with an Islamic State member overseas to arrange for his friend's travel, and ''that he felt humiliated for not having traveled'' with the friend to join ISIS, according to the complaint, which was signed by William Slattery, an F.B.I. special agent.

In their conversation, Mr. Raishani also expressed anger that the daughter of Anwar al-Awlaki, an American imam who joined Al Qaeda in Yemen and became the terror network's leading English-language propagandist, had reportedly been killed by United States forces in Yemen. Mr. Awlaki was killed in a United States drone strike in 2011.

The informant eventually introduced Mr. Raishani to the undercover detective, having described him as a ''true brother.'' The detective posed as someone who wanted to travel abroad to fight for ISIS, and this month, according to the complaint, the detective shopped with Mr. Raishani for clothing and boots Mr. Raishani would need.

Sarah Baumgartel, a lawyer for Mr. Raishani, declined to comment on Thursday. Mr. Raishani's arrest comes just weeks after prosecutors, in an apparently unrelated case, announced the arrest of another Bronx man, Ali Kourani, on charges of supporting Hezbollah.

Document NYTF000020170623ed6n0006r
