US
Tillerson Critiques Friends, Foes in Annual Religious Freedom Report; The first such assessment during the Trump administration criticizes  ISIS  genocide as well as key U.S. allies Saudi Arabia and Turkey

By Felicia Schwartz 
722 words
15 August 2017
23:46
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson criticized key allies Saudi Arabia and Turkey and said Islamic State is carrying out genocide during the release of an annual report on religious freedom on Tuesday, the first such presentation under the Trump administration.

The nation's chief diplomat said the Trump administration is committed to "advancing religious freedom around the world," and cited several "troubling examples" of abuses, including the persecution of religious minorities in Iran, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, China, Pakistan, Bahrain and Sudan.

"No one should have to live in fear, worship in secret, or face discrimination because of his or her beliefs," Mr. Tillerson said, speaking to reporters in a diplomatic reception room at the State Department.

The report, which is mandated by Congress, covers the year 2016 and makes no mention of President Donald Trump's push to ban immigration from six Muslim-majority countries and halt the refugee resettlement program, a move that he says is for security reasons.

During the 2016 campaign, Mr. Trump called for a "complete and total shutdown" of Muslims entering the United States. Lawyers have used these statements in challenges of Mr. Trump's executive order on the travel ban, which the U.S. Supreme Court will fully review on Oct. 10.

A report from a Muslim American civil rights organization released earlier this year found that hate crimes against Muslims in the U.S. increased by 44% in 2016.

Their assessment also calls the refugee resettlement program "a vital tool" for helping persecuted religious minorities, and hailed the U.S. as a world leader in refugee resettlement. Mr. Trump proposed cutting the number of refugees resettled from 85,000 in 2016 to 50,000 in 2017.

The U.S. has so far resettled roughly 50,900 refugees in fiscal year 2017, which began in October, according to State Department data.

"In the areas liberated from ISIS, the preferred option is to allow people to return to their traditional villages and areas," said Michael Kozak, a senior official in the State Department's bureau of democracy, human rights and labor. "We don't want to uproot communities that have been there for thousands of years and take them elsewhere if we can help provide them with the security and other means that they need to be able to resume their traditional role as valued members of their own societies."

In July, the Supreme Court allowed a partial version of Mr. Trump's refugee and immigration ban to go ahead, including denying entry to refugees who have no family ties to the U.S.

The report includes no assessment of religious freedom conditions in the United States.

"We do not grade ourselves," Mr. Kozak said.

Mr. Tillerson said Islamic State is "clearly responsible for genocide against Yazidis, Christians, and Shia Muslims in areas it controls or has controlled." He also faulted the terrorist group, which seized large swaths of territory in Iraq and Syria in 2014, for carrying out crimes against humanity and "ethnic cleansing."

He faulted Turkey for limiting human rights of some religious minority groups and called on them to release Andrew Brunson, an American pastor who Mr. Tillerson described as "wrongfully imprisoned."

On Saudi Arabia, a close U.S. ally that Mr. Trump visited in May and said the U.S. did not aim to "to tell other people how to live, what to do, who to be, or how to worship," Mr. Tillerson urged that Riyadh allow greater degrees of religious freedom for all citizens.

"The government does not recognize the right of non-Muslims to practice their religion in public," Mr. Tillerson said, citing harsh punishments for doing so. "Of particular concern are attacks targeting Shia Muslims, and the continued pattern of social prejudice and discrimination against them."

The Trump administration recently nominated Gov. Sam Brownback (R., Kansas) to be head the State Department's religious freedom office. Mr. Tillerson noted he would be the highest ranking person to serve in the role.

Mr. Tillerson faced criticism earlier this year for skipping a presentation of an annual human rights assessment, also performed by the State Department.

Document WSJO000020170815ed8f006sh
