Life
Russia's New Charm Offensive in Syria; As Bashar al-Assad's forces advance, his patrons in Moscow hope a public-relations push will win hearts and minds

By Nathan Hodge 
1,319 words
6 October 2017
19:20
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Umayyad Mosque in Aleppo was a symbol of Syria's tragedy: The Unesco World Heritage site was battered in fighting between the Syrian regime and its rebel foes, its minaret toppled and its ornate courtyard pitted by gunfire and shrapnel.

Now the medieval mosque has become a centerpiece for Russia's efforts to win hearts and minds in the Middle East.

Russian President Vladimir Putin intervened in Syria two years ago for several geopolitical reasons: to divert attention from the crisis in Ukraine, to strike a blow against U.S. dominance in the region and to prop up a longtime client state. Today, even as Russian bombing continues, the Kremlin is playing up a campaign of historic preservation, a move that appears aimed at deflecting international criticism of its support for Syria's emboldened president, Bashar al-Assad.

In mid-September, the Russian military flew two small planeloads of Russian and international journalists to Aleppo as part of a public-relations push meant to advertise the recent battlefield advances of the Moscow-backed Syrian government. The visiting reporters were brought to a school, where they were greeted by children singing patriotic songs and officials who praised the Russians. The journalists were shown a newly spruced-up square decorated with billboards of Mr. Assad, some saying "I believe in Syria"—n English.

The messaging was even more pointed at the 12th-century mosque. In the damaged courtyard, Mahmoud Akkam, the mufti of Aleppo, said that a private foundation based in Russia's Muslim-majority republic of Chechnya had committed $14 million toward restoring the mosque, one of the architectural masterpieces of the Muslim world.

The foundation is overseen by the family of Ramzan Kadyrov, Chechnya's powerful regional leader and an important ally of Mr. Putin's. Mr. Kadyrov once fought the Russian government during Chechnya's brutal separatist conflict between 1994 and 1996; now, he is at the vanguard of Russian efforts to combat militant Islam at home and abroad.

"Ramzan Kadyrov, like us, is a believer in the same religion," Mr. Akkam said. "We are united with him in the fight against terrorism."

A French reporter asked Mr. Akkam who had caused the damage to the mosque. "Les autres" ("the others"), he replied, referring to anti-Assad rebel groups that had been based in the mosque and its environs during the fighting.

Human-rights activists have long accused Mr. Kadyrov of serious abuses, including arbitrary detention and extrajudicial killings. Mr. Kadyrov denies the charges. When Mr. Akkam was asked about his benefactor's reputation, Russian military handlers instructed an interpreter not to translate the question.

Mr. Kadyrov's foot soldiers are now playing an important role in Syria. Russia has deployed military police units drawn in part from Chechnya to Aleppo, which Mr. Assad's forces retook late last year. These troops now patrol the city's devastated landscape, clearing mines and unexploded ordnance. And the deployment of military police from Muslim-majority republics of the Caucasus seems to be another Russian gambit to win some hearts and minds in Syria.

Mr. Putin's intervention in Syria has paid Moscow significant strategic dividends for a relatively modest military deployment. Russia's Defense Ministry won't disclose how many troops it has on the ground in Syria, but it operates dozens of drones, attack helicopters and strike aircraft from an air base in Latakia province. Russia also stations warships at a naval base in the Syrian port of Tartus.

Russian operations have largely focused on providing air support to the Syrian regime and its allies, including Shiite militias and Iranian combat troops. In mid-September, Lt. Gen. Alexander Lapin, the chief of staff of Russia's forces in Syria, said that his warplanes were flying some 50 sorties daily. The Russians say that their special-operations troops and advisers provide key intelligence and targeting support to Mr. Assad's forces. Syria has also been a testing ground for some of Russia's most up-to-date weaponry, including ship- and submarine-launched cruise missiles.

The Russian military presence on the ground has expanded in recent months. In September, Russian military engineers built a pontoon bridge across the Euphrates River, allowing Mr. Assad's troops to continue their dash into Deir Ezzour, the province that is the last major Syrian stronghold for Islamic State militants.

"The message from the Russian military is that the Syrian civil war is over, and reconstruction can begin," said Genevieve Casagrande, a Syria research analyst at the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War.

But the fighting in Syria isn't over, and Mr. Assad's regime, along with its Russian and Iranian backers, now face insurgents in areas where it has made gains.

"It's going to be a long, hard fight," Ms. Casagrande said. "Although the Russians are messaging that the war is over…t's now more of a jihadist opposition led by al Qaeda that Russia, Iran and the regime are going to have to battle."

As the propaganda war continues, Russian officials have routinely railed against the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a U.K.-based opposition monitoring group that collects data on civilian casualties through a network of volunteers inside Syria. Moscow has also accused the White Helmets, a group of first responders that works in rebel-held areas, of links to terrorist groups and of fabricating evidence of atrocities.

The reason for the defensiveness is clear: Russia's use of heavy firepower in Syria has drawn widespread international condemnation. Late last year, as Syrian regime forces backed by Russian air power besieged Aleppo, the Obama administration called for Russia and Syria to be investigated for war crimes over their attacks on hospitals and civilians. Then-Secretary of State John Kerry compared the devastation of Aleppo to Russia's block-by-block assault in late 1999 and early 2000 to retake Grozny, the capital of the then-breakaway republic of Chechnya.

Mr. Putin came to power vowing to show no quarter to terrorists, famously threatening to find Chechen separatists and "waste them in the outhouse." But the picture that Russia is now showing to foreign journalists in Syria—rom the mosque refurbishment to images of Russian soldiers distributing humanitarian aid—mphasizes a kinder, gentler phase of operations.

The messaging has a domestic component. Russia has a substantial Muslim minority, which the CIA estimates at some 10% to 15% of the country's population, and Mr. Putin often nods to Russia's religious diversity. In Syria, Russia's showcases of efforts at historic preservation seem designed to draw a contrast with the vicious tactics of Islamic State.

After Russian-backed Syrian troops retook the ancient city of Palmyra from Islamic State in 2016, the Russian military ferried in reporters—o see a concert conducted by maestro Valery Gergiev in the town's Roman amphitheater. And Russia's most recent scripted media tour in Syria was also heavy on the antiquities: In addition to the Umayyad Mosque, reporters also visited the Citadel of Aleppo, a medieval fortress that looms over the city, and the Krak des Chevaliers, a Crusader castle in Homs province.

Fyodor Lukyanov, a Russian foreign-policy expert, said that events such as the Palmyra concert were meant to emphasize Russia's contribution to defending the world, not just itself. "Putin clearly wants to be seen as the guarantor of civilization, as someone who can restore it," Mr. Lukyanov said.

Thomas Grove contributed to this article.

Write to Nathan Hodge at nathan.hodge@wsj.com

The Agonies of Syria

* Assad Regime Detains Opponents as It Reasserts Control

* Russian Special Forces Seen as Key to Assad's Aleppo Victory

* In Syria, New Conflict Looms as \b ISIS\b0  Loses Ground

Document WSJO000020171006eda6004h7
