World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,144 words
13 October 2017
13:05
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Questionable Outcome

Some employees at Outcome Health, a hot tech startup that installs video screens in doctors' offices and charges pharmaceutical companies to run ads on them, misled advertisers by charging them for placements on more screens than were installed and manipulating data on how well ads performed, according to former employees, several advertisers and company documents. Outcome has hired a law firm "to review allegations about certain employees' conduct that have been raised internally," a spokesman said. Investors including Goldman Sachs and Google parent Alphabet poured around $500 million into Outcome at what the Chicago company said was a valuation of $5.5 billion in May. Its charismatic 31-year-old CEO, Rishi Shah, has parlayed his startup into connections with political and financial heavyweights.

Out of Patience

The Trump administration said Thursday it intends to end billions of dollars in payments to insurers for subsidizing low-income consumers under the Affordable Care Act, saying they can't lawfully be made because Congress hasn't appropriated the money. President Trump, though, has told at least one lawmaker that the payments may continue if a bipartisan health-care deal is reached, according to people familiar with the matter. Earlier in the day, he signed an executive order directing several departments to explore ways to expand access to cheaper health-care plans with fewer benefits than the ACA mandates. Critics say this will drain the ACA market of healthier customers, sending costs soaring for the older and sicker people who remain.

Fed Outlook

Mr. Trump is nearing a decision on who will lead the Federal Reserve after Janet Yellen's current four-year term as chairwoman expires in February. He met with Stanford University economist John Taylor Wednesday for an interview also attended by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin and Vice President Mike Pence, according to a White House official. The other three candidates, say people familiar with the matter, are former Fed governor Kevin Warsh and current Fed governor Jerome Powell—ho had meetings with Mr. Trump last month—nd Ms. Yellen. The four offer two contrasting views: Ms. Yellen and Mr. Powell have advocated easy-money policies and favored gradual interest-rate increases, while Mr. Taylor and Mr. Warsh have criticized the Fed's aggressive monetary easing and called for changes in how it sets policy. It isn't clear which way the president is leaning.

Business Backpackers

While besuited businessmen haven't entirely abandoned briefcases and messenger bags, the backpack is gaining ground, as office elevators everywhere make clear. Sales of adult men's backpacks have grown steadily in the past two years, according to retail-trend tracker NPD, including a 5% increase between August 2016 and August 2017, to $864 million—8% of the entire U.S. backpack market. Driving that uptick, in part, is the backpack's evolution into a higher species of bag, with labels across the board crafting versions suited to the C-suite. "Men's backpacks have gotten more executive," explained NPD analyst Marshal Cohen. Elsewhere in our Off Duty section, explore Transylvania's more peaceable—nd less Dracula-inspired—harms, from stylish guesthouses to picturesque villages. Also, our auto columnist Dan Neil explains why the new Mazda MX-5 Miata RF belongs in the car Hall of Fame.

Today's Video

California Wine Country Burns

More than 20 major fires continued to burn across Northern California, sending tens of thousands of people fleeing. The fires are expected to burn for weeks.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Shifting Conditions, Poor Communications Complicate California Wildfires

House Passes Disaster Relief, Puerto Rico Credit Bill

WORLD

Syrians Caught in Crossfire as Fight Against \b ISIS\b0  Heats Up

Palestinian Authority, Hamas Reach Reconciliation Deal After 10-Year Feud

BUSINESS

Cord-Cutters Sap AT&T's TV Business

Amazon Suspends Entertainment Chief Roy Price

MARKETS

Cost Cuts, Credit-Card Lending Buoy Bank Earnings

Star Fidelity Manager Gavin Baker Fired Over Sexual Harassment Allegations

Number of the Day

14.5 trillion

The quarterly operating profit forecast by Samsung Electronics, in South Korean won ($12.8 billion)— record, and up 179% from a year earlier. But in a surprise, the head of Samsung's lucrative components business announced his resignation.

Today's Question

What are your thoughts on the how President Donald Trump's executive order will impact the U.S. health-care system? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Charity L. Scott

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the Boy Scouts welcoming girls, John Connor of Michigan wrote: "As a former scout and scout leader, recent decisions by the Boy Scouts of America are unfortunate and will result in even lower membership over time. The national leadership clearly does not understand their core market demographic or the appeal of Boy Scouts to parents or the boys. This is a slow-moving train wreck." Marybeth Beard of Kentucky shared: "I come from a scout family; my maternal grandfather was a scout leader; he, along with my uncle and brother all achieved the Eagle Scout rank. Boy Scouts are for boys, and Girl Scouts are for girls. Keep it that way, and keep the tradition alive. Embrace and promote the tradition of the scouts. This latest move is a grave mistake." And Dan Greenebaum of New York said: "I think this is a phenomenal development. As a former Cub Scout I think one of the best things about the experience was being taken and merited based on accomplishments. It gives kids a sense of self-worth and work ethic and none of that is gender specific. I understand the pushback from the Girl Scouts, but I know so many people who talk about their Eagle Scout status with pride and the only time I hear people talk about their time in Girl Scouts it is more of a statement that they did it without any real lasting connection. The programs provide different experiences and I think there is value in allowing children to choose which route they wish to go."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020171013edad0025t
