NONFICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
Silk on a Stick

By AARON RETICA 
713 words
2 July 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A FLAG WORTH DYING FOR

The Power and Politics of National Symbols

By Tim Marshall

Illustrated. 290 pp. Scribner. $26.

Some books are not meant to be read straight through, but maybe that shouldn't be held against them. Even if we learn nothing profound from them, we may get something out of plowing in.

''A Flag Worth Dying For: The Power and Politics of National Symbols,'' by Tim Marshall, a longtime diplomatic and foreign correspondent for Sky News and the BBC, is just such a book. It takes us on a lightning tour of the world of flags, with extra space for the Stars and Stripes and the Union Jack, but touching down on nearly every continent and in dozens of countries.

There is something a little dutiful about this tour, but Marshall offers us a surprising fact or six along the way. I was interested to discover, for example, that Gilbert Baker, the designer of the rainbow flag that emerged as a symbol of gay pride in the late 1970s, was inspired by the ubiquity of the American flag during the bicentennial celebrations in 1976.

Marshall oscillates between telling the story of the way flags unite us and the way they divide us. He is acutely aware that they often do both at the same time, and it is this tension that brings out his most illuminating writing. In one revealing instance, he describes traveling on a bus to a soccer match. When a collection of Leeds United supporters spy a group of black teenagers out the window, they begin to yell at them: ''There's no black in the Union Jack! Send the bastards back!''

One thing Marshall has taken away from his many years reporting abroad is that no matter how cosmopolitan they might seem, nations are essentially ''tribes with flags,'' as the diplomat Tahseen Bashir famously put it while extolling the nationhood of his native Egypt. Marshall is especially good on how flags encode the history of the violence that brought the nations they represent into being and how quickly they can become emblems of racial and ethnic bigotry. But for all Marshall's sophistication, there are inevitably some puzzling choices. The flags of Turkey, Iran and Israel all appear in the chapter ''Colors of Arabia.''

Marshall also tries to make other categories of flags reveal more than they probably can, as when he describes the apocalyptic design choices of vicious nonstate actors like ISIS or a more benign one like that of the European Union. The United Nations banner, he says mawkishly, and against much of the evidence he presents, can serve as a ''reminder that we can come together and that for all our flaws, and all our flags, we are one family.''

The writing in books like this is often rushed and cramped on the one hand and glib and expansive on the other, and Marshall does not transcend the genre. The supposedly clever bits can be particularly annoying. When Marshall discusses Oliver Cromwell's abandonment of the royal flag in 1649, he mentions the regicide of King Charles I before remarking, ''Eleven years later ... one of them made a comeback and it wasn't the headless Charles.'' By the time racing's checkered flag makes an appearance on Page 260, readers may well be ready for it to fly.

''A Flag Worth Dying For'' does not pretend to have the kind of coherent argument about terrain begetting destiny that Marshall's previous book, ''Prisoners of Geography: Ten Maps That Explain Everything About the World,'' did, but it suffers from the absence of one nonetheless. Oddly, Marshall's clearest statement on the strength of feeling flags arouse occurs in the acknowledgments at the end of the book, where he points out that ''flags are an emotive subject,'' and then pretty much leaves it at that. Readers looking for an understanding of how silk waving from a stick can come to mean everything will be disappointed, but they will not leave empty-handed either.

Aaron Retica is a senior staff editor for the Op-Ed page of The Times.

Emotive subject: Flag-raising on Iwo Jima, Feb. 23, 1945. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOE ROSENTHAL/ASSOCIATED PRESS) 

Document NYTF000020170702ed720004d
