Politics
U.S. Weighs ‘ones of Stability' As Part of Anti-Islamic State Effort; Trump administration hosting officials from 68 coalition nations at State Department meeting

By Felicia Schwartz 
577 words
22 March 2017
22:40
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. will work to establish "interim zones of stability" to protect refugees in Syria and Iraq as the international coalition against Islamic State works to retake territory from the extremist group.

Mr. Tillerson, speaking at a conference of the 68-member coalition against Islamic State, held at the State Department on Wednesday, said the coalition would intensify its efforts to confront the extremist group and called on other members to do more as the fight continues.

"The United States will increase our pressure on ISIS and al Qaeda and will work to establish interim zones of stability through cease-fires to allow refugees to return home," Mr. Tillerson said, using an acronym for the group.

The Trump administration has been exploring proposals for establishment of protected areas, sometimes called safe zones, in Syria. The idea has been pushed by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, but the Pentagon has long opposed the idea of creating heavily guarded zones because of the cost and military commitment required.

There is growing receptiveness among U.S. and international officials to the idea of setting up unofficial Syrian safe zones, which some officials have dubbed "interim de-escalation areas," along Syria's borders with Turkey and Jordan.

French Foreign Minister Jean-Marc Ayrault, who participated in the meeting, said he wasn't sure what Mr. Tillerson meant by "zones of stability," but thought they would cover areas retaken from Islamic State and help people to return to their homes.

A joint statement released at the end of the day's events by the participants included no mention of the zones.

Mr. Ayrault said he pressed Mr. Tillerson, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and other U.S. officials on specifics and a timeline for the fight, but the officials told him they need more time. Mr. Mattis told Mr. Ayrault that the campaign to retake Raqqa, Islamic State's de facto Syrian capital, must move quickly but the administration was still figuring out its strategy, Mr. Ayrault said.

"We've been asking for specific answers for a couple of weeks," Mr. Ayrault said. "I wish it went faster."

Mr. Tillerson said the coalition generally would intensify efforts as it moves from military operation to a stabilization phase in the fight against Islamic State, and urged greater intelligence sharing and law-enforcement cooperation as well as renewed focus on confronting the militant group online—fforts that the Obama administration also emphasized. Other than his suggestion of zones of stability, his policy prescriptions mostly tracked the Obama administration's playbook.

"We must increase the intensity of our efforts and solidify our gains," Mr. Tillerson said. "Soon our efforts in Iraq and Syria will enter a new phase."

Mr. Tillerson said the coalition would help to restore water and electricity and to clear land mines. He urged coalition members to contribute more militarily and financially.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi also spoke at the session. Mr. Mattis joined meetings in the afternoon and deputy national security adviser KT McFarland was also present.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Related

* Egypt President to Visit Trump in April

* U.S. Steps Up Support in Syria

* Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Coalition Accused of Airstrike on Civilian Shelter in Syria

Document WSJO000020170322ed3m0025t
