The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ A Major in Mosul

By CAITLIN DICKERSON 
641 words
20 June 2017
11:51
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

The battle for the Iraqi city of Mosul is entering its final and most challenging phase. While the United States leads airstrikes on Mosul’ old city, Iraqi forces are engaged on the ground there, in the most intensive urban warfare since World War II.

On today’ episode:

•en C. Solomon, a Times video journalist, embedded with one Iraqi unit. He tells the story of Maj. Sajjad al-Hour as he commands 150 men through the streets of Mosul.

•he Supreme Court makes a rare decision to get involved in politics. We check in with Adam Liptak, who covers the court, about whether partisan gerrymandering violates the Constitution.

Background reading and watching:

•r. Solomon’ video about Major Hour:

•r. Liptak on the Supreme Court’ decision to hear a case on partisan gerrymandering, potentially setting the stage for a ruling that could impose limits on a practice that has helped define American politics for centuries.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @itscaitlinhd. I’ your host while Michael Barbaro is on vacation. He’l be back next week.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Major Sajjad al-Hour, who leads the Iraqi unit with which a Times journalist recently embedded. | Ben C. Solomon/The New York Times | A short film following Major Sajjad al-Hour as he commands 150 men through the war-torn streets of Mosul in an attempt to eradicate ISIS. “od willing, Iraq will be their graveyard,”e said. | By BEN C. SOLOMON and TAIGE JENSEN 

Document NYTFEED020170620ed6k002s1
