World
Palestinians Kill Israeli Police Officer;  ISIS  Claim Is Refuted; Hamas, PFLP also claim responsibility for Jerusalem attacks

By Rory Jones 
458 words
17 June 2017
16:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

TEL AVIV—tabbing attacks by Palestinian militants in Jerusalem left an Israeli police officer dead, Israeli officials said Saturday, but authorities cast doubt on a claim by Islamic State that its fighters were responsible for the assaults.

The three attackers also lightly injured several other officers and civilians before security forces shot them dead in locations outside Jerusalem's Old City on Friday evening, Israeli police said. One of the assailants had a gun that jammed, avoiding more serious casualties, the police added.

Sergeant Major Hadas Malka, 23 years old, was stabbed while engaging the attackers and later died of her wounds, Israeli officials said.

The bloodshed on Friday ended a lull in Palestinian violence against Israelis after a wave of attacks that began in September 2015 had largely abated in recent months in part due to greater security coordination between Israeli and Palestinian security forces.

Islamic State quickly took responsibility for the attacks, but Israeli authorities said they had no evidence to support the extremist group's claims, which were also dismissed by other Palestinian militant groups.

Islamic State made the claim in a statement on its official channel, its first about an attack in Israel.

In response, Islamist movement Hamas, which controls the Gaza Strip and regularly claims responsibility for Palestinian violence against Israelis, said one of its members and two operatives from the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine conducted the attacks.

Hamas spokesman Sami Abu Zuhri said Islamic State's claim aimed to "muddy the waters."

The PFLP, a secular nationalist group that has only a small level of support among Palestinians, said in a statement it also was responsible for the attacks.

The three attackers came from a village in the Palestinian West Bank, Israeli security officials said. The authorities launched an investigation into the assaults and attackers' affiliations to militant groups.

As Islamic State loses territory in Iraq and Syria, the extremist group has claimed responsibility for a number of attacks globally in a bid to project power and maintain its relevance among Sunni supporters. But it isn't often clear if the attackers are directly supported by the group.

The extremist group has said it was behind more than a dozen attacks around the world this month, including on major landmarks in Tehran and in a bustling London food market.

Israeli security officials have said some Palestinians are sympathetic to the extremist group's ideology but estimate it doesn't have widespread support among Palestinians who instead back nationalist groups such as Hamas that are driven to establish a Palestinian state.

Write to Rory Jones at rory.jones@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170617ed6h000ul
