Foreign Desk; SECTA
Saudis Say They Seized 3 Iranians

By THOMAS ERDBRINK and RICK GLADSTONE; Thomas Erdbrink reported from Tehran, and Rick Gladstone from New York. 
610 words
20 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN -- Saudi Arabia said on Monday that its navy had seized three members of Iran's Revolutionary Guards piloting a boat loaded with explosives toward a Saudi offshore oil drilling rig.

The claim was not confirmed but threatened to further fray relations between the rival powers, which have accused each other of fomenting terrorism and instability against a growing backdrop of tensions roiling the Middle East.

Iran denied the Saudi claim and accused the Saudi Navy of having shot at boats belonging to ''simple fishermen'' from Iran's southern Persian Gulf port of Bushehr in an unprovoked attack that had left one Iranian dead.

About the only thing both sides appeared to agree on was that the episode happened on Friday, when Iran's state media first reported its version of events.

The Saudis said over the weekend that their navy had fired warning shots at three small boats and two had escaped, but it reported nothing about arrests made or explosives found. Why the Saudis amended their side of the story on Monday was not made clear.

The Saudi Information and Culture Ministry said in a statement quoted by Agence France-Presse that three captured Iranians, identified as members of the Revolutionary Guards Corps, had been caught late Friday as their boat approached the Saudi-owned Marjan oil field in the Gulf. The ministry said the captives were ''being questioned by Saudi authorities.''

The ministry said the boat's cargo had made it ''clear this was intended to be a terrorist act in Saudi territorial waters designed to cause severe damage to people and property.''

In Iran, the Interior Ministry director general for border affairs, Majid Aqababai, said ''Saudi Arabia's claim on the arrest of Iranian military personnel is not true because the individuals who were confronted were simple fishermen on a fishing boat.''

In remarks quoted by Iranian news services, Mr. Aqababai also reiterated the Iranian contention that ''Saudi Arabia shot at two Iranian fishing boats and killed one of the fishermen.''

Relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia, which compete for influence in the Middle East, have been increasingly strained over the opposite sides they have taken in the Syria and Yemen conflicts.

But the tensions have been particularly aggravated in the month since President Trump's visit to Saudi Arabia, when he emphatically embraced its Sunni rulers. They signed a $110 billion weapons deal with the United States and extolled Mr. Trump's denunciations of Iran.

Apparently emboldened by Mr. Trump, the Saudis moved quickly to isolate Qatar, one of the few Persian Gulf nations that maintains good relations with Iran, a shift that has aggravated political tensions among them and left the United States in an awkward position because Qatar hosts the largest American air base in the Middle East.

Then on June 7, two prominent sites in Tehran were hit in deadly terrorist attacks that were claimed by the Islamic State, the militant group also known as ISIS. Iran said they had been encouraged by Saudi Arabia.

On Sunday, Iran fired missiles into Syria, claiming it was hitting Islamic State targets in retaliation.

''The wood is very dry in the Gulf, it's dangerous,'' said Cliff Kupchan, chairman of the Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy that follows Iran. ''When Iran looks at ISIS it sees Saudi Arabia.''

Mr. Kupchan said he did not expect a Saudi-Iranian war, ''but we're going to have to live with an increased level of destabilizing incidents for a long time.''

Document NYTF000020170620ed6k0005p
