World News: U.S. Defense Secretary Says Russia No Help on  ISIS 

By Gerald F. Seib   
469 words
9 January 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved   

WASHINGTON -- Russia has done nothing to help defeat Islamic State forces in Syria and has adopted a strategy of "explicitly thwarting the U.S." elsewhere, outgoing Defense Secretary Ash Carter said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.

Mr. Carter, who has a long history of working with Russian officials, said Russian President Vladimir Putin's efforts to blunt U.S. influence have increased and are making it harder to find areas in which Washington and Moscow can work together.

"I think it is something that has grown steadily under Putin's leadership," he said. "It seems to be part of his self-conception. And one of the ways he defines the success of his policy is not by results on the ground but the level of the discomfort he can create in the rest of the world and show to his people as the point of his policy."

He added, "That's what makes it so difficult to build a bridge" to Russia's leaders.

Mr. Carter, who will leave his Pentagon office as President-elect Donald Trump takes over later this month, said he wasn't attempting to advise the incoming administration. But his appraisal of Russian behavior, in Syria and beyond, stands in stark contrast with the analysis Mr. Trump and some of his advisers have offered of Russia generally and Mr. Putin specifically.

Mr. Trump has said he admires Mr. Putin as a leader, has said he would like a better relationship with Russia in general, and has specifically cited Russia as a potential ally in defeating Islamic State forces.

But Mr. Carter bluntly said the Russian military, as it has taken on an increasingly assertive role in shoring up Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in recent months, has been unhelpful in the fight against Islamic State forces, also known by the acronyms ISIS and ISIL.

"They haven't done anything to fight ISIL," he said. "They've been fighting the moderate opposition along with the Syrian government. Everything they've done has been wrong headed and completely the obverse of what they said they were going to do."

Russian leaders also haven't fulfilled their promise to use their foothold in Syria to "facilitate a transition" away from the Assad regime to a broader government that includes the moderate opposition to Mr. Assad, Mr. Carter said.

"They haven't done that," he said. "They haven't facilitated that transition. They've just doubled down on the civil war."

As Mr. Carter's comments suggest, Russia has emerged as the national-security issue on which the contrast between the outgoing Obama administration and the incoming Trump administration is most striking.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170109ed190001f
