World News -- Middle East Crossroads: In Syria, a New Conflict Looms as  ISIS  Loses Ground

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
761 words
8 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Syrian regime's successful offensive in Deir Ezzour this week pushed it ahead in the race against America's Kurdish-led allies over who will inherit Islamic State's remaining Syrian real estate.

With the extremist group losing ground fast, President Bashar al-Assad has emerged in his strongest position since the Syrian uprising began in 2011. Yet large parts of the country remain outside his reach, including an American-protected zone run by the Kurds in northeastern Syria.

The question now is where precisely the line between regime and Kurdish areas will be drawn after Islamic State's defeat and whether it will solidify into a semi-permanent partition of the country or spark a new bout of violence that could force the U.S. to make difficult choices.

American military planning calls for the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, currently finishing the battle to take Raqqa from Islamic State, to push south down the Euphrates River and to seize the extremist group's remaining cities of Mayadeen and then al-Bukamal on the Iraqi border. That swath of Syria also holds most of its oil and gas reserves.

This week's blitz by the Syrian army and its Shiite militia allies to relieve a besieged garrison in Deir Ezzour could within days cut off the way for such SDF advances. Large parts of the city remain under Islamic State control.

"It was a race but once the regime takes Deir Ezzour, it's game over for the U.S.-led coalition. They will have to stop," said Monzer Akbik, a leader of the mostly Arab Tayyar al-Ghad party loosely allied with the SDF. "After Deir Ezzour, the regime will be able to go to al-Bukamal, and once al-Bukamal is taken, the Iranians will have achieved an uninterrupted land route from Tehran to Baghdad to Damascus to Hezbollah in Beirut."

The regime and SDF aren't enemies, so far. They share a hostility to Turkey and Turkey's Syrian proxies, who occupy an area northeast of Aleppo. Despite skirmishes over the past year, regime-held enclaves operate in Kurdish territory in the cities of Hasakah and Qamishli, while the Kurdish enclave of Afrin in western Syria is connected to the rest of the world through regime territory.

"The SDF and the regime generally did not fight each other until now. We will see soon whether this will still hold true," said Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy.

"The idea in U.S. policy circles is that we will now have a soft partition of Syria along the Euphrates," he said. "But the regime and the Iranians are not interested in a soft partition. What they are after is a military victory."

Indeed, Mr. Assad has rejected the idea of maintaining Kurdish autonomy in northern Syria. Safwan Akkash, one of the leaders of the moderate and predominantly Sunni Arab Syrian opposition, predicted that the regime will eventually attack America's Kurdish allies.

"The regime will not tolerate a Kurdish autonomous region," he said. "The current conflict will be followed by another conflict."

That may not happen immediately. But such a conflict appears imminent and should it erupt, it would confront Washington with an unpalatable choice of either abandoning its Kurdish allies or taking direct military action against the Assad regime, said Robert Ford, the U.S. ambassador to Syria under the Obama administration who is a fellow at the Middle East Institute in Washington.

"Sooner or later, the government in Damascus will try to reimpose its authority," Mr. Ford said. "That will be a big decision for the Trump administration: Should they use American armed forces to protect the Syrian Kurdish autonomous region? If they do, it would be against international law, and I don't think there is any country in the region that would support it."

One hope of avoiding such a scenario lies in the United Nations-sponsored peace process in Geneva. There, however, the Kurdish movement isn't even represented because of Turkish objections.

This means that, for Mr. Assad, there are few reasons to be flexible in the peace process now, said Kamal Alam, a visiting fellow at the Royal United Services Institute in London who frequently travels to Damascus. "They will still go to the talks, but they no longer have the pressure to give up too much."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170908ed980000l
