Life & Arts -- Film Review: Journalism Faces Terror Head On --- An improvised news organization exposes the horrors of life under Islamic State

By Joe Morgenstern 
513 words
14 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A13
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

At a time of ceaseless blather about fake news, it's easy to forget what journalism at its finest can do. "City of Ghosts," a documentary by Matthew Heineman, provides a vision of dedication to reportorial truth in the desperate efforts of an improvised news organization with a haunting, if unwieldy name: "Raqqa Is Being Slaughtered Silently," or RBSS.

In 2012 Raqqa, a Syrian city on the banks of the Euphrates River, was the site of demonstrations against the Assad regime. Once the protests were crushed, an ensuing political vacuum was filled by foot soldiers of Islamic State who moved in, declared a caliphate and made the city an Islamic State stronghold. Soon afterward, a small group of young, middle-class residents began to document the atrocities that Islamic State was visiting on their defenseless hometown. They weren't trained as reporters -- among them were university students, a teacher and a self-described hermit who loved photography -- but they had cellphone cameras, and used them to shoot on the fly and send stories to the outside world, whether the world was interested or not.

They were grass-roots journalists where there wasn't any grass, only the daily danger of being caught by murderous Islamic State zealots and tortured or killed, as several of the RBSS people were. Using their guerrilla footage, Mr. Heineman's film gives us a stunning picture of life in a city gone mad: casual sidewalk executions; bodies left as cautionary displays in Raqqa's centrally located and surreally named Paradise Square; signal-detection vans on the move in a constant campaign to shut down the town's communication networks; Islamic State thugs throwing satellite dishes on trash trucks; Islamic State recruiters rounding up kids for indoctrination in day camps. ("Children are ISIS's firewood," a journalist says.)

As city life grows intolerably dangerous, some RBSS stalwarts flee to the supposed safety of a Turkish town across the border, or to the guilt-producing comfort of Germany. They're connected by a network, after all; they can relay stories sent by colleagues who stayed behind. At this point, though, "City of Ghosts" takes a sinister turn. What began as a celebration of amateur journalists becomes a more familiar story of refugees. Islamic State retaliates against one RBSS refugee by killing his father and brother, both of whom remained in Raqqa. Another activist is killed on a Turkish street by an Islamic State operative who crossed the border to track him down.

No one feels safe, yet the reports keep coming and the RBSS efforts bear fruit.The word gets out. The images get out. Shaky cellphone videos shot on Raqqa's streets show up on CNN world news broadcasts. Whether the truth sets anyone free is unknowable at this point, but the city that was being slaughtered silently has been heard, and its suffering has been seen.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170714ed7e0001o
