World
Photos of the Day: March 15; A migrant returns to Mexico, the Dutch head to the polls, ultra-Orthodox Jews protest Israeli military conscription, and more

381 words
15 March 2017
20:43
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Catherine Bloemen, 86 years old, sitting surrounded by her collection of teddy bears and other small toys in her Brussels home.

A woman, left, arriving at a voting station to cast her vote in the Dutch general election in The Hague, Netherlands.

An ultra-Orthodox Jew getting hit by a police water cannon in Jerusalem during a protest against Israeli army conscription. While military service in Israel is mandatory, ultra-Orthodox Jews have been exempt for years. People have been protesting in the streets both in favor and against it.

New Yorkers slogging through the slush and snow on Park Avenue in Manhattan, a day after a nor'easter moved through the area with snow, high winds and sleet.

A Justice Department staffer installing a poster of a suspected Russian hacker before a news conference in Washington.

U.S. authorities charged four men, including two officers from Russia's spy agency, with hacking computer systems at Yahoo Inc. and stealing personal data that affected hundreds of millions of users.

An Iraqi soldier picking his way through Mosul's heavily damaged museum as the fight against Islamic State militants continued outside. The museum was heavily looted during the 2003 Iraq war but then rebuilt, only to suffer more damage when ISIS then seized it.

A U.S. Air Force flight engineer doing sit-ups during a flight after the refueling of coalition aircraft involved in the fight against Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.

Syrian security forces standing guard after suicide bombers attacked a Damascus courthouse, shown here, and a restaurant, killing at least 39 people and wounding dozens more as Syria's conflict entered its seventh year.

An undocumented immigrant wading back across the Rio Grande at the U.S.-Mexico border on Tuesday in Roma, Texas. U.S. Border Patrol agents had intercepted him on the Texas side of the river and forced him back to Mexico.

An Indian rescue worker looking for survivors in the wreckage of a collapsed building in Kanpur. Several people were said to have been killed after a gas leak caused an explosion at the cold storage facility.

Document WSJO000020170315ed3f008kh
