U.S. News: Washington Wire

626 words
18 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

NAFTA

Currency Rules Are

Under Consideration

The Trump administration has told senators it is considering adding rules barring currency manipulation to the North American Free Trade Agreement, according to congressional aides, a departure from past policy that could set a precedent for other trade deals.

The aides said Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer told senators Wednesday that he is looking at currency rules as a part of planned renegotiation of Nafta, the 23-year-old trade pact that connects the U.S., Canadian and Mexican economies.

An administration official confirmed the U.S. is looking at some sort of currency disciplines but didn't say whether the rules would be binding and enforceable through Nafta's dispute-settlement procedures.

Mr. Lighthizer is briefing key House and Senate lawmakers this week on the agreement, and the Trump administration is expected in coming days to send Congress a letter announcing plans for formal Nafta negotiations. The talks, which could start in three months, would likely include Nafta updates to address technology and the internet, as well as stronger rules on which products qualify for duty-free trade in order to favor North American supply chains.

Canada and Mexico haven't been the focus of U.S. criticism over currency, but adding currency rules to Nafta could set a precedent for including them in future negotiations with Asian trading partners.

-- William Mauldin

---

HOMELAND SECURITY

Wisconsin Sheriff

To Join Department

Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke, a longtime supporter of President Donald Trump and a familiar face in conservative media, said he accepted an appointment as assistant secretary in the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

In an interview with conservative WISN radio host Vicki McKenna, Sheriff Clarke said he would be leaving his position in June to join the Office of Partnership and Engagement, where he will be the chief liaison between the agency and state, local and tribal law enforcement.

In an email, a spokeswoman for the department said the position is typically announced only when made official. "No such announcement with regard to the Office of Public Engagement has been made," she said. The position doesn't need Senate confirmation. Sheriff Clarke didn't respond to requests to comment.

A prolific user of social media and a regular presence on conservative talk shows, Sheriff Clarke has repeatedly stirred controversy. In a 2015 tweet, the African-American sheriff said Black Lives Matter protesters would "join forces with ISIS" to bring down the country. He also has said mass incarceration of black Americans is a lie, and he has said that undocumented immigrants have more protections than American citizens in sanctuary cities.

-- Shibani Mahtani and Zusha Elinson

---

SENATE

North Carolina's Tillis

Collapses During Race

North Carolina Sen. Thom Tillis collapsed while running in a race in Washington on Wednesday but quickly issued a statement saying he was doing well.

About an hour after he collapsed, the first-term Republican senator posted a video message on Twitter in which he said he was "doing well."

"Just got overheated. No CPR, no special measures, just checking me out," Mr. Tillis said. "See you back on the Hill."

Mr. Tillis, 56 years old, was running in a 3-mile race in the capital's Anacostia Park. He was tended to by paramedics and transported to George Washington University Hospital in an ambulance.

Mr. Tillis was elected to the Senate in 2014 after serving as the speaker of the North Carolina House of Representatives for four years. In the Senate, Mr. Tillis has sought to work with lawmakers in both parties to build support for an overhaul of the immigration system. The senator is married with two children.

-- Reid J. Epstein

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170518ed5i0001x
