Foreign Desk; SECTA
Officials Are Cleared of Skewing  ISIS  Data

By MARK MAZZETTI and MICHAEL S. SCHMIDT 
866 words
2 February 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- An internal Pentagon investigation found that senior officials at United States Central Command did not deliberately skew intelligence assessments about the war against the Islamic State, despite a widespread view among analysts within the command that reports were manipulated to present a distorted view of the military campaign's progress.

The results of the investigation by the Defense Department's inspector general, released on Wednesday morning, largely exonerated the two men who led Central Command's intelligence analysis in 2014 and 2015, Maj. Gen. Steven Grove and his civilian deputy, Gregory Ryckman. Dozens of analysts at the command, known as Centcom, had anonymously accused the men of altering intelligence conclusions to paint a rosy picture of the campaign's military successes and the capability of Iraqi troops fighting Islamic State militants.

The inspector general's investigation disputed those claims.

''We did not find that anyone intentionally attempted to distort intelligence,'' the report concluded. ''Nor did we find a systematic distortion of intelligence.''

At the same time, the 190-page report sketched a portrait of a sometimes dysfunctional intelligence headquarters at Centcom, the sprawling military command in Tampa, Fla., in charge of all American military operations in the Middle East and Central Asia. It also cited several examples of changes to intelligence reports that led many analysts to believe that their bosses were manipulating the conclusions.

In one instance, when Iraqi forces dropped their weapons and retreated in the face of an Islamic State attack, the word ''flee'' was deleted and replaced with ''leave.'' Another intelligence report, the inspector general found, initially said that Iraqi troops had ''lost control of'' an Iraqi city. The final version of the report said that the troops had ''ceded the severely damaged city center and repositioned troops in nearby neighborhoods.''

''These few examples became known and widely discussed, and we believe they contributed to the belief that certain words were removed from products to distort the meaning,'' the report said. ''However, we did not uncover, nor did witnesses provide, any examples of editing'' that altered the facts being presented.

The inspector general's investigation stemmed from complaints by a group of Centcom analysts, some with decades of experience working on Middle East issues, who believed that their reports were being manipulated. In September 2015, The New York Times identified Gregory Hooker, the top Iraq analyst at Centcom, as one of the leaders of the group. The complaints were taken seriously, partly because of Mr. Hooker's credibility within the military intelligence community.

Mr. Hooker has studied Iraq for two decades, and in 2005, he publicly criticized President George W. Bush's administration for pushing ''amateurish and unrealistic'' plans during the invasion of Iraq in 2003.

In addition to the Pentagon's inspector general, three Republican-controlled House committees have been investigating the Centcom allegations. The chairmen of the committees issued a statement Wednesday saying the report ''confirms there were numerous problems within the Central Command.'' They cited a widespread perception that intelligence officials ''were distorting intelligence to present a more positive view of the success'' of Iraqi troops, giving an optimistic view of the fight against the Islamic State, also known as ISIS or ISIL.

In August, the three panels released an interim report concluding that Centcom analysts were largely justified in their concerns that senior leaders at the command had manipulated the conclusions of intelligence reports. That report offered no evidence that analysis had been changed at the behest of Obama administration officials.

The chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Devin Nunes, Republican of California, said that he planned to bring the whistle-blowers before the committees to ask them about the report's findings.

''We are going to continue to do our work and give them the opportunity to come in and give us an assessment of what's in the report,'' Mr. Nunes said in a telephone interview.

Representative Adam B. Schiff of California, the top Democrat on the committee, said in a statement on Wednesday that the fact that ''the whistle-blowers in this case had legitimate concerns, and even a perception of skewed intelligence, particularly among veteran analysts, is a problem that needs fixing.''

While noting that the new report ''spelled out weaknesses and flaws'' in Centcom's oversight of developing intelligence assessments, Mr. Schiff said there was ''no evidence that intelligence was falsified or that its leaders made any attempts to make the intelligence fit a political narrative.''

The Pentagon investigation, led by Glenn A. Fine, the acting Defense Department inspector general, also produced a 540-page classified report that was not released on Wednesday.

The unclassified report cited statements from intelligence officials from other parts of the government who said that Centcom intelligence reports were often more positive than others.

The top intelligence officer for the Joint Chiefs of Staff told investigators that he believed Centcom had ''a more positive assessment of the effects that were being achieved against ISIL than he did from reviewing the same sources.''

But the officer told investigators that it was ''not unusual to have different viewpoints of the same facts.''

Document NYTF000020170202ed2200057
