NONFICTION
Book Review Desk; SECTBR
The Terror Hydra

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
1,353 words
11 June 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
19
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

ANATOMY OF TERROR

From the Death of bin Laden to the Rise of the Islamic State

By Ali Soufan

359 pp. W. W. Norton & Company. $27.95.

About a year and a half ago, the former British prime minister Tony Blair made a penetrating, if bleak, observation about the West's 21st-century attempts to deal with the Arab world and the miseries that keep bursting out from its ceaseless contest between corrupt autocrats and Islamist zealots. In a CNN interview, Blair had found himself on the defensive against the accusation that the Iraq war of 2003, which he had helped the Bush administration lead, was a primary cause of the rise of the Islamic State. He responded, among other things, with this: ''We have tried intervention and putting down troops -- in Iraq. We've tried intervention without putting in troops -- in Libya. And we've tried no intervention at all but demanding regime change -- in Syria. It's not clear to me that, even if our policy did not work, subsequent policies have worked better.'' Indeed, each of the three major options that seem to be available for addressing the dysfunctional region whose sufferings incubate and inspire 21st-century Sunni Islamist radicalism -- occupation and nation-building, providing light-footprint support to local partners or just staying out of it -- has been a demonstrable failure. Without forgetting the West's 20th-century meddling in the Middle East as a contributing factor to its woes, the depressing implication, 15 years after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, is that perhaps there is no solution. Even if matters can be temporarily improved in one spot, they only worsen in another -- and periodically there will always be another attack like the one in Manchester.

Into this moment of counterterrorism policy despair, Ali Soufan, one of America's original terror warriors, has returned to help us take stock. Soufan is a Lebanese-born Muslim former Federal Bureau of Investigation agent. He gained fame as one of the most important law enforcement officials going after Al Qaeda in the period surrounding its 2000 suicide attack on the naval destroyer Cole and the 9/11 attacks. In 2011, six years after leaving the F.B.I., he published a memoir, ''The Black Banners,'' that recounted his interrogations of important terrorist captives -- and his battles with the C.I.A., whose hoarding of intelligence he blamed for preventing the F.B.I. from breaking up the 9/11 plot, and whose subsequent use of torture he opposed. Soufan has now written ''Anatomy of Terror.'' It serves as a valuable guide to the story so far and offers some predictions about what the next chapter may look like, after the Islamic State is forced back into a mere insurgency.

''Anatomy of Terror'' contains a few first-person moments that read like outtakes from ''The Black Banners.'' But it is generally much more the detached work of a historian and analyst, aggregating and synthesizing materials available elsewhere. Despite its subtitle, Soufan retells the Qaeda story from the beginning, enriching that now oft-told tale with newer materials, including some from the trove of communications seized in the 2011 raid on Osama bin Laden's compound. His approach is to explain the movement through the eyes of a few key terrorist figures -- the better, he writes, ''to help point the way to a deeper understanding of their worldview, their motivations and how best to combat the destructive ideology they represent.''

Several of the characters he selects for this purpose are perhaps overly familiar, like Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, the Jordanian street thug turned zealot who founded Qaeda's particularly sociopathic affiliate in Iraq before American bombs killed him in 2006. Zarqawi was already the principal subject of Joby Warrick's Pulitzer Prize-winning 2015 book, ''Black Flags: The Rise of ISIS.'' But the best and most interesting parts of Soufan's book center on a less famous figure: Saif al-Adel, a pragmatic Egyptian ex-soldier who devoted his professional life to the post-Cold War global Sunni Islamist movement and played a secondary role, Zelig-like, in most of the important events in Qaeda's history. Although loyal to bin Laden, whom he served as security chief, he was also frustrated by upper-management decisions; in particular, he argued against the 9/11 plot as a reckless mistake that would bring disastrous repercussions to the organization and its haven in Taliban-ruled Afghanistan. Al-Adel managed to survive -- in part because he spent seven years in Iranian custody -- and is back with the original Qaeda organization as it regroups today.

Interspersed with such narratives, Soufan offers lucid explanations of a worldview that to casual Western eyes may seem mindlessly nihilistic, but is coherent within its own terms of seeking to establish a caliphate -- a theocratic state. The coldblooded strategy behind terrorist attacks on fellow Muslims in the Middle East is to create zones ''within the Muslim world so lawless and chaotic that the authority of the state would collapse. Al Qaeda could then rush in to fill the vacuum left by governmental failure, providing the people with much-needed services like education, water and electricity and ruling in accordance with its version of Islam.''

And Soufan shows how even among those committed to the Islamist ideology, there are fierce internal debates. Bin Laden and the core of Al Qaeda believed in pursuing their strategy slowly and methodically over generations, avoiding holding territory while the United States remained capable of military pushback, and in the meantime promoting good relations with tribal hosts. The splinter organization that became the Islamic State believed in speeding up that timetable, immediately declaring a caliphate and brutally enforcing austere social rules on the luckless Iraqi and Syrian civilians under its control. This dispute led to the 2014 split between the two groups, but Soufan predicts that after the Islamic State no longer holds territory, making the issue moot, they may reunite -- perhaps under the leadership of Hamza bin Laden, the son of the slain founder, who seems to be being groomed for the role.

So where does this leave the West? Near the end of his book, Soufan invokes the Hydra -- the multiheaded serpent that, whenever Hercules chopped off one head, grew two in its place. In the myth, Hercules defeats the monster after figuring out that cauterizing the stumps would prevent regeneration. The counterterrorism analogy Soufan offers is for the West not to depend on military solutions, but to use force sparingly to hold back the bad guys in order to ''provide time and space in which to build the institutions necessary for lasting peace,'' using ''all the tools of diplomatic, political and economic support at your disposal.''

But to date, efforts to build the institutions of a healthy society in places like Afghanistan and Iraq have not achieved much enduring success. Elsewhere, Soufan himself dismisses the prospect of transforming the Arab world's tribal patriarchies into ''Madisonian utopias anytime soon,'' writing that they too often have a ''cavalier disregard for education'' and ''relatively little openness to the wider world,'' which in turn produces ''legions of young men confused about their identity, angered by the hobbling of their prospects and incapable of critical thought -- the kind of people most acutely vulnerable to demagogues like Osama bin Laden and Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi.'' Against that backdrop, Soufan observes: ''As the seemingly limitless flow of recruits to the Islamic State attests, Zarqawi and men like him seem to constitute an endlessly renewable resource.''

ANATOMY OF TERROR

From the Death of bin Laden

to the Rise of the Islamic State

By Ali Soufan

359 pp. W. W. Norton & Company.

$27.95.

Charlie Savage is a Washington correspondent for The Times. A revised and updated edition of his latest book, ''Power Wars: The Relentless Rise of Presidential Authority and Secrecy,'' appears in paperback this month.

A news conference in Baghdad after the killing of Abu Musab Al-Zarqawi, leader of Al Qaeda in Iraq, 2006. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALI HAIDER /EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170611ed6b0004o
