
World
Trump Gives Generals More Freedom on  ISIS  Fight; Pentagon brass take lead on decisions that were made by White House under Obama; ‘ authorize my military,' Trump says

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
1,368 words
15 April 2017
04:29
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S. military commanders are stepping up their fight against Islamist extremism as President Donald Trump's administration urges them to make more battlefield decisions on their own.

As the White House works on a broad strategy, America's top military commanders are implementing the vision articulated by Defense Secretary Jim Mattis: Decimate Islamic State's Middle East strongholds and ensure that the militants don't establish new beachheads in places such as Afghanistan.

"There's nothing formal, but it is beginning to take shape," a senior U.S. defense official said Friday. "There is a sense among these commanders that they are able to do a bit more—nd so they are."

While military commanders complained about White House micromanagement under former President Barack Obama, they are now being told they have more freedom to make decisions without consulting Mr. Trump. Military commanders around the world are being encouraged to stretch the limits of their existing authorities when needed, but to think seriously about the consequences of their decisions.

The more muscular military approach is expanding as the Trump administration debates a comprehensive new strategy to defeat Islamic State. Mr. Mattis has sketched out such a global plan, but the administration has yet to agree on it. While the political debate continues, the military is being encouraged to take more aggressive steps against Islamic extremists around the world.

The firmer military stance has fueled growing concerns among State Department officials working on Middle East policy that the Trump administration is giving short shrift to the diplomatic tools the Obama administration favored. Removing the carrot from the traditional carrot-and-stick approach, some State Department officials warn, could hamper the pursuit of long-term strategies needed to prevent volatile conflicts from reigniting once the shooting stops.

The new approach was on display this week in Afghanistan, where Gen. John Nicholson, head of the U.S.-led coalition there, decided to use one of the military's biggest nonnuclear bombs— Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb, or MOAB—o hit a remote Islamic State underground network of tunnels and caves.

Gen. Nicholson said Friday it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in the previous day's bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike had killed 36 militants, saying it was unable to provide precise figures yet.

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that a second MOAB was available for use in the country, but no decision had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike, which took place in Nangarhar province, along the country's mountainous border with Pakistan.

Gen. Nicholson indicated that he—ot the White House—ecided to drop the bomb. "The ammunition we used last night is designed to destroy caves and tunnels. This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allows me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A senior administration official said Mr. Trump didn't know about the weapon's use until it had been dropped.

Mr. Mattis "is telling them, ‘t's not the same as it was, you don't have to ask us before you drop a MOAB,'" the senior defense official said. "Technically there's no piece of paper that says you have to ask the president to drop a MOAB. But last year this time, the way [things were] meant, ‘'m going to drop a MOAB, better let the White House know.'"

Indeed, on Thursday Mr. Trump himself emphasized the free rein he gives the Pentagon. "I authorize my military," Mr. Trump said. "We have given them total authorization."

On Friday, the U.S. military said it has sent dozens of soldiers to Somalia, where Mr. Trump recently gave the head of the U.S. Africa Command more leeway to carry out counterterrorism operations against al-Shabaab, the al Qaeda affiliate in the area.

The more aggressive military approach comes as the long slog against Islamic State is bearing fruit. The group is on the back foot in its Iraqi stronghold, Mosul, and is facing a hard battle to defend its de facto Syrian capital, Raqqa.

The U.S. has sent more forces into Iraq and Syria, stepped up support for Saudi Arabia's fight against Houthi militants in Yemen, and dispatched an aircraft carrier to the Korean Peninsula amid growing evidence that North Korea is preparing for a new nuclear test.

Loren DeJonge Schulman, who served as senior adviser to Mr. Obama's national security adviser, said a more assertive military campaign is destined to fail unless it is part of a broader strategy against Islamic State, also known by the acronyms ISIS and ISIL.

"It's crazy that the Trump administration thinks that ‘aking the gloves off' is either a winning strategy against ISIL or a useful narrative for the White House or the military," said Ms. Schulman, now a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security.

Derek Chollet, a former assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs in the Obama administration, said giving the Pentagon more freedom is one of the most significant things Mr. Trump has done.

"It's not clear to me that he's making any tough decisions," said Mr. Chollet, now executive vice president at the German Marshall Fund of the United States. "All that he's essentially done is ceded decision authority down to protect himself from making tough calls."

The flip side of the Trump administration's emphasis on a more-free-wheeling military approach to Islamic State is an apparent reduction of the use of soft-power tools—conomic development, diplomacy and democracy-building—avored by the Obama White House.

Some State Department officials describe being cut out from the White House's counterterrorism strategy in the Mideast, with efforts to nurture democratic governments and push for more secular education systems carrying less weight in the White House's evolving approach.

"State is being systematically sidelined," said a State Department official who has worked on counterterrorism issues in Washington and abroad.

The official said the White House strategy of prioritizing military might over diplomacy makes it hard to persuade Mideast allies to relax their grip on power. Many of Washington's closest Arab allies are autocratic regimes guilty of human-rights abuses that critics say fuel terrorism.

"The problem there is that in many of the places where you need carrots, those carrots are often seen as threats to local governments," the official said, referring to democracy and society-building programs the State Department funds across the Mideast.

Egypt offers a prime example of the Trump administration's leanings. When Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi, a military strongman, visited the White House earlier this month, Mr. Trump gave him a warm welcome. Mr. Obama had refused to meet him because of his regime's alleged human-rights abuses.

U.S. officials in the Mideast say a counterterror approach that focuses solely on military might without programs to fight the causes that feed extremism could backfire, leading groups like Islamic State to go underground and wait for future opportunities to re-emerge. They are particularly concerned about Raqqa, where a U.S.-led military coalition is closing in around the city but post-liberation stabilization plans aren't finalized as State Department officials wait for White House guidance.

Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil in Kabul and Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170415ed4f0005l
