At Site of Big Bomb,  ISIS  Battle Grinds On

By Jessica Donati 
877 words
18 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ASAD KHEL, Afghanistan -- Near the blast site of the "Mother of All Bombs," U.S. and Afghan forces are trying to dislodge Islamic State from a mountain stronghold where the militant group recently established a new front.

Afghan commandos and U.S. Special Forces clustered with their armored vehicles on Monday by a river at the foot of the Spingar Mountains, less than a mile from where the powerful U.S. bomb struck last week. Apache helicopters and fighter jets buzzed constantly overhead, and blasts echoed across the valley.

Remains of Islamic State fighters lay strewn in the grass yards away, casualties of a battle for control of the area that began more than two weeks ago, Afghan commandos told the first journalists to arrive in Asad Khel since Thursday's bombing. The bombing came days after an American soldier was shot in the neck and killed in a nearby village.

The bomb -- often referred to by its nickname but officially called the GBU-43, or Massive Ordnance Air Blast -- is one of the largest non-nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal and was used to target caves and tunnels in the valley beyond the village of Asad Khel.

A spokesman said the U.S. military is still assessing the damage from the bomb. An Afghan special forces commander, who was seeking shelter from the sun in a grove of trees by the river, said the bomb left a "big hole in the ground" and showed a picture of the bombing site on his phone.

In the days leading up to the blast, U.S. and Afghan forces killed more than a dozen Islamic State fighters, driving the militants out of much of the surrounding Achin district and into the mountains, according to the commander, who declined to give his name.

"It gives us a lot of pleasure to kill them," said the commander, who also showed pictures of commandos posing with the dead bodies of two men with long black hair and beards.

Islamic State first appeared in Afghanistan in late 2014, as the U.S.-led coalition reduced its presence in the country. The following year, the militant group expanded to as many as a dozen districts in Nangarhar province, its main Afghan stronghold, including Achin.

The snow-capped Spingar Mountains extend for hundreds of miles along the border with Pakistan, and Osama bin Laden is believed to have taken shelter there in 2001 after the U.S.-led invasion following the September 11 attacks.

The U.S. military dropped its 15,000-pound "Daisy Cutter" bombs there at the time. Sixteen years on, the U.S. has again resorted to its heaviest weaponry to fight a new brand of militants in the same area, Islamic State.

But just as the militants have lost substantial ground in Iraq, Syria and Libya, the Islamic State presence in eastern Nangarhar province has shrunk by about 150 square miles since early March, according to the U.S. military. The Islamic State affiliate in Afghanistan doesn't have a spokesman.

Yet the valley around Asad Khel hasn't yet been secured and the Afghan government presence in Achin is minimal. Two Islamic State fighters on Saturday tried to attack the government's district headquarters several miles away with a car bomb, but a U.S. airstrike intercepted the vehicle, according to security sources.

The Islamic State fighters in the area include Afghans and foreigners, according to the Afghan commander. He said identification cards found among the fighters were from Arab countries, Pakistan, Uzbekistan and other places. The Wall Street Journal could not independently verify those claims. A U.S. soldier in command at the site declined to be interviewed.

The recent advances by U.S. and Afghan forces have allowed some residents of Asad Khel to return to their homes for the first time in two years and inspect the damage.

The ruins of abandoned shops and homes are pockmarked with bullets and graffiti. Next to the local school, among the worst-hit buildings, were freshly dug, unmarked graves where villagers had buried two Islamic State fighters, according to Afghan commandos.

Except for a handful of men who were tending to cornfields with shovels and a few children who were playing in the fields, the village was mostly deserted. Some villagers fear Islamic State fighters could return if U.S. and Afghan forces don't oust them from the mountains.

"We request from them please go further" up the valley, said Sabitullah, who like many Afghans goes by one name. He was home for the first time in two years, after he said Islamic State killed two of his relatives, forcing him to flee to a safer area. "Go to the mountain and attack their center and we will support you," he said.

The police chief of Nangarhar province, Abdul Rahman Rahimi, said estimates of the number of Islamic State fighters in the province range between 700 and 1,200. He said the current offensive has turned the tide against Islamic State in the area.

"In my view, their backbone is broken," he said. "They have lost momentum."