World
Splits Within Iraq's Three Communities Reshape Its Politics; The groups' internal rivalries could divide the country further, or bring the groups closer together

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
915 words
13 April 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—onventional wisdom holds that Iraq is a nation starkly divided among its three main components: Shiite Arabs, Sunni Arabs and Kurds.

Yet, another dynamic is gaining importance. Each of these three groups—s well as the smaller communities such as the Yazidis and Christians—s also beset by deepening internal rivalries. These political cleavages could further destabilize the country. They also could bring it closer together, creating a new environment where political agendas trump the hard allegiances of sect and ethnicity.

"We now have splits within the Shiites, within the Sunnis, and within the Kurds. For an average citizen, this is not necessarily a bad thing," said Sajad Jiyad, managing director of the Al-Bayan Center for Planning and Studies, a Baghdad think tank. "It would help change the sectarian discourse and alignment that has been prevalent until last year."

The issue of how Iraq's political life develops after the ouster of Islamic State from its stronghold of Mosul is of critical importance to the rest of the Middle East. Several of Iraq's neighbors and allies have been drawn into the country's sectarian and ethnic conflicts that have reverberated far beyond its borders since the 2003 U.S. invasion.

One milestone looming is parliamentary elections scheduled for April 2018 that also will determine the fate of Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The fragmentation of the political scene makes it difficult to a form a strong government able to implement overdue changes. But at the same time, it could render the country more stable by preventing another sectarian overreach by the Shiite majority—r a long-mulled secession by the autonomous Kurdistan region in northern Iraq.

Among Iraq's Shiite community, the political rivalries run straight through the biggest Shiite party, Dawa, to which both Mr. Abadi and his main rival, former Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, belong.

Mr. Abadi has deftly used the Mosul campaign to strike an unlikely alliance with Kurdistan President Masoud Barzani and to position himself as a war leader.

Mr. Maliki, meanwhile, has reached out to Mr. Barzani's rivals in Kurdistan and to the Sunni speaker of parliament as he successfully pushed through no-confidence motions against the ministers of defense (a Sunni) and finance (a Kurd) last year. A third Shiite force, led by cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, engineered massive protests last year as it claimed to represent the will of the people while implicitly supporting Mr. Abadi.

One of Mr. Maliki's prominent allies, Shiite lawmaker Salah Abdul Razaq, said the time has come to unite representatives of Iraq's three main population groups behind a single political project and leadership.

"The nature of Iraq now requires that we move from ethnic and sectarian conflict to political competition inside parliament," he said. "We call for a political majority which covers a group of political blocs from all the components, with the Sunnis and the Shiites and the Kurds."

Regardless of whether Mr. Maliki, with his history of marginalizing Sunnis and Kurds, could lead such a project, few consider the emergence of a pan-Iraqi political movement likely—t least not before elections.

"In elections, Kurds will vote for the Kurds, Sunnis will vote for the Sunnis, and Shiites will vote for the Shiites. Not a single Kurd will vote for an Arab, not a single Sunni will vote for a Shiite, and not a single Shiite will vote for a Sunni," said Fuad Hussein, chief of staff of Kurdistan President Barzani. "But after elections, an alliance is a possibility."

Mr. Barzani—hose term expired in 2015—as been facing a major political challenge within Kurdistan itself. His party, which controls the regional capital Erbil, has physically prevented the region's parliament from naming a successor, essentially shuttering the legislature.

For now, that intra-Kurdish conflict combined with the global oil slump has muted the prospect of Kurdistan's independence from Iraq.

"We are on the threshold of another civil war here in the Kurdistan region," warned Yousif Sadiq, speaker of Kurdistan's parliament who hasn't been able to enter Erbil since 2015. "What we are doing in the Kurdistan region, especially by the region's dominant authorities, is the reverse of building a state."

With most of Iraq's Sunni areas devastated by war against Islamic State, the country's Sunni Arab political scene is even more fragmented. Turkey recently tried to bring these Sunni politicians together by sponsoring their meeting in Ankara. That, however, doesn't help with a more fundamental problem: Many Sunni Arabs blame their own community's traditional leaders for allowing Islamic State, also known as ISIS, to overrun their hometowns in the summer of 2014.

"Nobody represents us. When ISIS came to Iraq and destroyed the city, all these politicians abandoned us and fled to Erbil. We don't support any of them anymore," said shopkeeper Ghazi Mohammed whose grocery faces the ruins of Mosul's al-Salam hospital, the site of a major battle between Islamic State and Iraqi troops.

Homaid Jasem, a real-estate agent in a Mosul neighborhood that Islamic State had renamed after its founder Abu Musab al Zarqawi, agreed.

"When I will vote, I will vote for the new and the young ones," he said. "The politicians that we had did nothing for us."

Document WSJO000020170413ed4d0028l
