World
Rebels Claim Capture of Syrian City From  ISIS ; Turkish-backed group takes al-Bab as peace talks with regime open in Geneva

By Raja Abdulrahim 
923 words
24 February 2017
01:52
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Turkish-backed rebels said they had seized one of Islamic State's last urban strongholds in northern Syria on Thursday, as the opposition began a new round of peace talks with the regime in Geneva.

Turkey said forces had entered the center of al-Bab. The capture of the city would further shrink the extremist group's territory, which still includes its de facto capital in Syria, Raqqa, as well as large parts of the surrounding province and the neighboring province of Deir Ezzour. In the Iraqi city of Mosul, U.S.-backed government forces dealt Islamic State another loss on Thursday by taking part of the international airport.

"We rid the whole city from ISIS this morning and now we are headed toward Tadif," said Mutasim Abbas, a commander with the rebel Mutasim Brigade, part of a coalition of opposition groups in the battle for al-Bab. Tadif, on the southern outskirts of al-Bab, sits on the highway leading to Raqqa and could mean the Turkish-backed forces intend to eventually launch an offensive on the city.

Turkey has played a central role in the fight for al-Bab, and has launched airstrikes on targets in the city.

"Today we can say that almost all of al-Bab has been taken under control, and that [forces have] entered the center of town," Turkish defense minister, Fikri Isik, told Turkish television. "We will say that al-Bab is completely cleared of Daesh elements when search and screening activities are finished," he said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

The peace talks, backed by the United Nations, opened as escalating regime airstrikes and clashes between the two sides showed the fragility of a two-month-old cease-fire. Talks in Kazakhstan in January and February were meant to secure the cease-fire, but failed to put in place a monitoring mechanism to ensure it wasn't violated.

U.N. Syria envoy Staffan de Mistura said Wednesday that Russia, a key regime backer, had asked Damascus to halt airstrikes on rebel-held areas during the course of the talks, which are expected to continue into next week.

"I'm not expecting a breakthrough…ut a beginning of a series of rounds that should enable to go much more in depth on the substantive issues that are required for a political solution in Syria," Mr. de Mistura said.

Islamic State is excluded from the Geneva talks and has been steadily losing territory across Syria and Iraq as many forces—ome also at war with one another—ave battled against the militants.

Which force will lead the battle to take Raqqa has been the subject of much diplomatic debate.

Turkey, an important U.S. ally in the fight against Islamic State, has been pushing to sideline the Kurdish-led SDF, a U.S.-backed force fighting the terror group elsewhere in Syria, in favor of one dominated by Arab rebel fighters. Raqqa is a predominantly Arab city.

But U.S. officials have long maintained that it would be difficult to launch a successful assault on Raqqa without the Kurdish YPG militia that leads the SDF.

The offensive against al-Bab began months ago as Turkish-backed rebels gradually took control over much of the surrounding countryside. Turkey credited U.S. warplanes with helping to launch airstrikes on militant targets ahead of ground assaults.

At the same time, forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad were also advancing near the city, raising the specter of clashes between the two sides which are in open warfare elsewhere in Syria.

The two-week offensive inside the city was slowed as a result of the entrenched Islamic State militants who dug trenches, planted mines and sent suicide car bombers, said Mahmoud Hamo, a spokesman with Faylaq al-Sham, a U.S.-backed rebel faction under the umbrella of the Free Syrian Army. In addition, thousands of civilians weren't able to flee their homes and hunkered down amid the fighting and daily airstrikes.

More than 120 civilians, including 38 children, were killed since Feb. 7 as a result of Turkish airstrikes and artillery, according to the U.K.-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights.

Islamic State's media agency, Amaq, reported that more than 380 civilians were killed as a result of the airstrikes and offensive.

On Thursday, rebel forces supported by the Turkish military were already clearing mines and other explosives laid by Islamic State throughout al-Bab, reported Turkey's state-run Anadolu news agency.

Planting explosives before withdrawing from towns and cities is a common tactic by Islamic State and has led to the deaths of at least dozens of civilians in Syria, monitoring groups reported.

Some residents of al-Bab who had stayed throughout the two-week offensive were leaving their homes on Thursday as engineering units were beginning to comb the city looking for improvised explosive devices, including inside homes and public buildings, said Mohammad Al-Sheikh, a native of al-Bab and member of the First Regiment rebel faction.

"The homes are heavily planted with improvised explosive devices so they will leave until we clear and dismantle them," he said. "There is no life in the city, no electricity, no water, no infrastructure."

Nour Alakraa, Noam Raydan, Ned Levin and Margaret Coker contributed to this article.

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170223ed2n0080y
