'We Were Never Brothers': Iraq's Divisions May Be Irreconcilable

By Aziz Ahmad 
926 words
27 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Erbil, Iraq -- 'I swear by God we are not brothers," the Sunni Arab sheik shouted from the audience in response to a conservative Shiite lawmaker's plea for brotherhood. The occasion was a conference last summer at the American University of Kurdistan, in Duhok. It was the two men's first encounter since the fall of Mosul, Iraq's second largest city, to Islamic State in June 2014.

Conference organizers had hoped for reconciliation, but there was little sign of it. "We were never brothers," the sheik said. "We've always been afraid of each other." His candor drew nods from the Sunni men seated in front rows. The speakers and audience members condemned one another as failures and exchanged blame for the army's flight, for embracing Islamic State, and for perpetrating massacres.

Sectarian distrust -- a problem that has plagued Iraq for much of its modern history and has been amplified since Saddam Hussein's fall in 2003 -- was laid bare that day. A country that should have been brought together under the adversity of Islamic State's rampage seemed to be further apart than ever, with divisions extending far beyond Mosul.

Almost a year later, a fragile coalition of Kurdish, Arab and American forces is slowly advancing in Islamic State's primary stronghold in Mosul. But retaking the city will not unify Iraq. The current Shiite-led political discourse in Baghdad is synonymous with the denial of rights to minorities, including Kurds. Conversely, in Mosul a Sunni Arab majority marginalizes minorities, who in turn accuse Sunnis of supporting ISIS.

Sinjar, west of Mosul, is a case in point. When I visited last year I saw no sign of peaceful coexistence. The local security chief, a Yazidi, told me that Sunni Arabs from his village, Kojo, had joined ISIS's brutal terror against the Yazidis, a religious minority. Men from the al-Metuta tribe helped kill "hundreds," he said, including 68 members of his own family. "Of course I remember them," he said. "Those Arab men had a hand in the honor of our women. It's not possible to live together again."

In meetings with Iraqi officials and community leaders, I've seen how Islamic State's campaign has aggravated animosity across tribal, ethnic and religious lines. Without a political track to address tensions between Sunnis and Shiites or Kurds and Arabs, the day-after scenario remains perilous.

Addressing the problems begins by restoring trust. For Mosul, Baghdad is already on the wrong foot. The offensive against ISIS includes a coalition of Shiite militias, despite strong protests from Mosul's predominantly Sunni provincial council. The new formula must tackle minorities' fears of marginalization by granting local autonomy, including to Christians persecuted by ISIS militants, and by implementing laws already in place to give Sunnis a stake and isolate extremists.

We Kurds can help. We make up a third of the province's population. For over a year, our Peshmerga fighters were poised for an assault on Mosul, but our persistent calls for a political agreement were ignored. An agreement during the military campaign is still necessary to prevent intercommunal conflict.

Such an agreement should outline a path toward governance and offer more than a Shiite-centric alternative. In parallel, there must be an effort to demobilize Shiite militias formed in the aftermath of the war by engaging the Iraqi Shiite spiritual leader, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, for a religious decree. It should also call for the groups' withdrawal from areas liberated by the Peshmerga.

Baghdad should not impose solutions. It should instead lead talks with Turkey and Iran to defuse regional tensions that intersect in Mosul. Iraq's problem with Turkey can be solved by ending Baghdad's payments to the anti-Ankara Kurdistan Workers' Party, known as PKK, in Sinjar and demanding the group's withdrawal, in line with calls from local officials and the provincial council.

More broadly, once the fight is over, there needs to be a political reckoning by Kurds and Arabs about how the Iraqi state can go forward. It's too late to salvage the post-2003 project; the country has segregated itself into armed enclaves. The Kurdish people suffered a litany of abuses, including genocide, under successive Sunni regimes. More recently, despite a shared history, the Shiite-led government reneged on promises for partnership and revenue sharing. It suspended Kurdistan's budget and prevents us still from buying weapons. Given that experience, Kurdish loyalty to an Iraqi identity remains nonexistent.

For us, complete separation is the only alternative. Our pursuit of independence is about charting a better course from Iraq's conceptual failure. The path forward should begin from a simple truth: Iraq has already fallen apart, and the country will be better off realigned on the parties' own terms.

A central goal for the U.S. should be to empower the Kurdistan Region. We are a stable, longstanding U.S. ally amid a sea of unrest. We've proved to be a valuable partner in the war on terrorism and share common values and a commitment to democracy.

The advance on Mosul represents the turn of a chapter that transcends Iraq's three-year war. It represents a moment of reckoning and an opportunity to consolidate the Kurdistan Region on terms that will de-escalate conflict and safeguard its peoples.

---

Mr. Ahmad is an assistant to the chancellor of the Kurdistan Region Security Council.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170327ed3r0000z
