World; Asia Pacific
Taliban Attack Afghan Army Base, Killing Dozens

By MUJIB MASHAL and NAJIM RAHIM 
840 words
21 April 2017
15:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —ozens of soldiers were killed when Taliban gunmen and suicide bombers in military uniforms stormed an Afghan Army base in northern Afghanistan on Friday, Afghan and Western officials said.

The attack on the 209th Corps in Balkh province began around 1 p.m., in a crowded area where soldiers, most of them unarmed, were leaving Friday prayers or eating lunch.

A Western military official in Kabul, who did want to be publicly identified because he is not authorized to speak to the media, said the number of deaths could reach 70 or more. Zabiullah Kaker, a member of the Balkh provincial council, said people inside the army corps had told him at least 66 soldiers were killed in the attack and 74 others wounded.

But Ahmad Javid Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan Army’ commando forces who was at the scene of the attack, said at least 20 Afghan Army soldiers were killed and 30 others wounded.

Six assailants dressed in military uniforms drove in two army vehicles past the first checkpoint, according to Lt. Col. Abdul Qahar Aram, a spokesman for the corps. At the second checkpoint, one of the suicide bombers blew up his explosives, allowing the militants to enter, take up positions and start firing at soldiers, who were leaving Friday prayers, which are performed in a large common setting, or making their way to lunch.

“he dining room and the mosque are close to each other,”aid Colonel Aram. “t was lunchtime —hey entered both the mosque and the dining room.”

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack through a spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid. In a message posted on Twitter, Mr. Mujahid said the assailants were led by four soldiers inside the base who had long been Taliban infiltrators.

Hashem Azimi, a member of Balkh provincial council, agreed that the attackers seemed to have help from the inside where, he said, at least five infiltrators joined them after they had breached the security measures.

“he two ranger vehicles had pretended that they were coming back from operations at some front line —hey were all covered in dust,”r. Azimi said. “hen they reached the gates of the army corps, they started firing and one of them got off the vehicle and blew himself up.”

The attack came weeks after militants entered the Afghan army’ main hospital in Kabul, and killed more than 50 people in a siege that lasted nearly seven hours. The Islamic State claimed responsibility for that carnage. In that attack too, security officials said, the militants had inside help.

While the Islamic State has been getting attention in recent days because of the American military’ use of its largest conventional bomb against an ISIS cave complex in eastern Afghanistan, the Taliban remains the biggest security threat to the country. The group has expanded its territory over the past couple years, and threatens several cities.

Such a major breach of security at the army corps in Balkh, even before the start of the insurgents’pring offensive, is a major concern to Afghan forces who are already struggling in the fight against the Taliban. In 2016, more than 6,700 Afghan forces were killed in battle.

Analysts and officials with the American-led coalition forces, who are training and assisting the Afghan forces, have been very critical of the inept leadership and widespread corruption in the ranks, which is contributing to the large number of casualties. Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of the American and NATO forces here, has expressed his need for a few thousand more American troops on the group to assist and train the Afghan forces.

Analysts said the repeated ability of a few militants to cause tremendous bloodshed in highly secure areas was an especially troubling sign ahead of the Taliban’ spring offensive. Jawed Kohistani, an Afghan security analyst, said the Balkh attack seemed to be in retaliation for Afghan special forces going on the offensive in recent weeks and targeting local Taliban leaders in night raids. Such daring attacks as Friday’, he said, are possible because of infiltrators and by the Taliban’ careful study of the Afghan security forces and their weaknesses.

“ou know the attack was carried out on Friday, which is a national holiday, in the afternoon, which is the time of Friday prayer, ”aid Mr. Kohistani, adding, “n Friday, the military preparation of soldiers for responding to possible attack is decreased, the checking of the personnel also decreases and the enemy was aware of that.”

“he gap, weakness and problem is in management, in the intelligence agency, and the carelessness of high-ranking officials,”e said.

Mujib Mashal reported from Kabul, and Najim Rahim from Kunduz, Afghanistan. Fahim Abed contributed reporting from Kabul.

* After Deadly Attack on Kabul Hospital, ‘verywhere Was Full of Blood’

* Suicide Bomber in Afghanistan Rams Car at Militia Base, Officials Say

* Afghan Security Reforms Falter, With Tough Fighting Ahead

Document NYTFEED020170421ed4l0048t
