Briefing
Senate Health Bill, Liu Xiaobo, Harry Potter: Your Monday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,331 words
26 June 2017
11:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

• busy docket .

The Supreme Court said today that it would hear a case on President Trump’ revised travel ban, setting up a major decision on executive power.

The justices also agreed to hear an appeal from a baker who lost a discrimination case after refusing to make a cake for a gay couple. He had cited religious objections.

•enate scrambles on health bill.

Republican leaders are trying to rally support for their measure to repeal the Affordable Care Act in time for a vote this week, before a congressional recess.

President Trump expressed confidence on Sunday that the bill would pass, but five Republican senators have said they won’ support the bill without changes. One is Dean Heller of Nevada, a state that expanded Medicaid coverage under Obamacare and that has much to lose from its repeal. We looked at the choices he faces.

We also checked in on local news outlets across the U.S., where reaction to the bill appears to be uniformly negative.

•here Trump zigs, Tillerson zags.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has found himself out of sync with President Trump and his top advisers, especially on Middle East policy. We look at how the top U.S. diplomat’ priorities have hit a wall.

Separately, the White House is pushing military spending in Africa over humanitarian and development assistance.

•ew blow for a battered work force.

Thousands of people in the U.S. face unemployment as retailers struggle to compete with online shopping.

Even as e-commerce grows, it isn’ absorbing these workers.

•apturing vital data on ISIS.

We got a rare glimpse of a handful of secret and increasingly risky commando raids in the nearly three-year American ground war against the Islamic State.

•hy Grenfell Tower burned.

A team of reporters in London investigated how the incineration of the 24-story high rise —he deadliest fire in Britain in more than a century —as rooted in a regulatory breakdown.

•ailed Chinese dissident is hospitalized.

Liu Xiaobo, who received the Nobel Peace Prize for his writings promoting democracy, has been moved from prison to be treated for late-stage cancer, one of his lawyers said today.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, President Trump’ promise to repeal Obamacare could come down to abortion, and a look at a group of strong advocates for his stance on immigration.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•akata, the Japanese auto parts maker crippled by vast airbag recalls, filed for bankruptcy protection in the U.S. on Sunday.

•ood delivery services require precision: Bananas can’ get cold, and milk mustn’ tip. A day on the truck shows why the business is so troublesome.

•he second-phase results of stress tests for banks in the U.S. are among the headlines to watch this week.

•.S. stocks were mixed on Friday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•e’e introducing a weekly Smarter Living newsletter to deliver tips for a better, more fulfilling life straight to your inbox. Sign up here, and catch up on our latest advice.

•ecipe of the day: Green goddess dressing makes a zippy marinade for roast chicken.

Over the weekend

•housands lined the streets for New York City’ annual Pride March. We captured similar celebrations around the world in a 360 video.

•artha, a Neapolitan mastiff, won the dubious distinction of “orld’ Ugliest Dog.”ne person described her as “o ugly she’ beautiful.”

•“ransformers: The Last Knight”as No. 1 at the North American box office but took in a disappointing $45.3 million, easily the least of the franchise.

Noteworthy

•oar with a golden eagle.

In today’ 360 video, take flight with Widow at an Oregon training facility for injured or captive birds.

• maritime mystery.

Investigators have plenty to unravel after a collision between a U.S. destroyer and a cargo ship that left seven sailors dead.

Veteran seamen describe it as incomprehensible.

• uiz time!

Did you keep up with last week’ news from around the world? Test your knowledge.

•he Times Reader Center.

We spend a good deal of time listening to readers’uestions, concerns and suggestions. But our readers often don’ know how we’e thinking about this feedback, or how we’e responding to it. We’ like to change that.

We’e set up a forum for our journalists to speak directly to you about our coverage. Please let us know what you think.

•uotation of the day.

“t was almost an out-of-body experience after being so deeply hurt and nobody listening, and nobody wanting to talk to you about this.”

—Sabine Durden, on how President Trump’ vow to stop illegal immigration resonated among families who had lost loved ones at the hands of undocumented immigrants.

Back Story

A certain boy wizard was introduced to the world 20 years ago today, when “arry Potter and the Philosopher’ Stone”as published in Britain.

The book, about Harry and other students at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, was an immediate hit that just kept growing in popularity. The magic inspired real-world Quidditch teams, book clubs, theme parks and a multibillion-dollar film franchise.

J. K. Rowling wrote “hilosopher’ Stone”n the cafes of Edinburgh, and the hometown paper, The Scotsman, praised her as “a first-rate writer for children.”

(The J. stands for Joanne —o to her friends —nd the K. for Kathleen, her grandmother’ name. Her publisher was worried that a book by an obviously female author wouldn’ appeal to boys. And her surname is pronounced like “owling.”)

A year later, the book arrived in the U.S. with a tweak to its title: “hilosopher’”ecame “orcerer’”to more clearly convey that it was about magic.

It was a New York Times best seller for weeks before a review on Feb. 14, 1999, called it “ wonderful first novel”y an author who had achieved “omething quite special.”

As Albus Dumbledore, one of her characters, once said, words are “ur most inexhaustible source of magic.”

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Women gathered at Angel Stadium in Anaheim, Calif., on Sunday for prayers and a celebration of Eid al-Fitr, the Muslim festival marking the end of Ramadan. | Patrick T. Fallon/Reuters | During the recent dispute between Qatar and Saudi Arabia, Secretary of State Rex Tillerson tried to position himself as an intermediary. The president, however, openly sided with the Saudis. | Brendan Smialowski/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Sinclair Browne is a driver in New York for Peapod, an online grocery business. “’ fast,”e said. “n and out, in and out.” Bryan Anselm for The New York Times | The N.B.A.’ logo was a frequent sight during New York City’ Pride March on Sunday. It was the only major professional sports league to take a prominent role in the gay pride event. | Justin Gilliland/The New York Times | Fans in costume celebrated the release of “arry Potter and the Deathly Hallows,”he seventh and final book in the series, in July 2007. | Hiroko Masuike for The New York Times | Take a flight in 360°ideo with Widow, a golden eagle. | By DAVE SANDERS, NIKO KOPPEL and GUGLIELMO MATTIOLI 

Document NYTFEED020170626ed6q0028m
