Briefing
Health Care, Donald Trump, Foxconn: Your Thursday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,213 words
27 July 2017
11:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•.O.P. seeks a way forward on health care.

The Senate rejected a measure on Wednesday that would have repealed major parts of the Affordable Care Act without providing a replacement, leaving Republicans divided about how best to proceed. Their options include a “kinny”epeal, which would eliminate only a few provisions of the current law.

We have a running tally of how senators have voted on the various proposals. Senator Lisa Murkowski, Republican of Alaska, has emerged as a critical voice: She is unlikely to be swayed by pressure from President Trump, our chief Washington correspondent writes.

Follow our live briefing as the debate continues today.

•rump surprises with transgender ban.

President Trump abruptly announced on Wednesday that  transgender people would not be allowed to serve in the military, reversing a year-old policy reviled by social conservatives.

The president said the U.S. could not afford the “remendous medical costs and disruption,”lthough the White House could not answer questions about how a ban would be carried out.

We spoke with transgender service members about their reaction, and invite readers who are affected by the ban to contact us.

•ragile shelter for Sessions.

President Trump’ aides have tried to discourage him from his continued complaints about Attorney General Jeff Sessions, who has a powerful base of support in the Senate.

By Wednesday afternoon, several officials said they thought that Mr. Trump would let Mr. Sessions stay in office, at least for now.

•alifornia’ ambitious climate agenda.

Over the past decade, the state has passed a sweeping set of laws based on a theory that it’ possible to cut greenhouse gas emissions far beyond what any other state has done and still enjoy robust economic growth.

We looked at how California is trying to pull this off.

•reed from ISIS, but not from the torment.

One of our reporters visited a camp in northern Iraq, where a scene of barely conscious women and girls hints at the cost of years of sexual enslavement under the Islamic State.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the upcoming “ote-a-rama”n the Senate.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•he Federal Reserve, as expected, left its benchmark interest rate unchanged on Wednesday. The central bank said it would wind down its post-crisis economic stimulus campaign “elatively soon.”

•pple was the innovative leader in personal computers for years. Now, it’ Microsoft, our tech columnist writes.

Separately, Foxconn, the Taiwanese electronics supplier for Apple and other tech giants, said it would build a factory in Wisconsin, creating at least 3,000 jobs.

•ritain said it would ban the sale of new diesel and gas cars by 2040, joining a growing global push for electric vehicles.

•.S. stocks were up on Wednesday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•ir-conditioners can make some people’ noses clog or run for several reasons.

•sk Well: Is sweating good?

•ecipe of the day: Smothered pork chops will feed a crowd.

Noteworthy

•6 hours on Michigan’ Upper Peninsula.

In today’ 360 video, get a taste of waterfalls, pebble beaches and a sculpture park.

• lonely crusade.

Lawyers for dissidents in China increasingly face a terrible choice: acquiescence or imprisonment.

•n ode to shopping malls.

Farewell, pleasure palaces of days past. A filmmaker’ series chronicles a way of life —articularly for children of the ’0s —s it reaches its end.

•he year of the goat.

The farm animal has become the hot new pet, not to mention a ubiquitous presence on Instagram.

•est of late-night TV.

On “he Tonight Show,” transgender comedian discussed the military ban: “ow, I don’ necessarily want to serve in the military, but I want the right to serve.”

•uotation of the day.

“here is more space, and we are going to enjoy it more. Once we learn to adapt to dancing in that kind of area —oh, it’ going to be lit.”

—Maurice Matheson, a subway dancer, on adjusting to the seat-free New York City subway cars that were announced as a way to accommodate more passengers.

Back Story

In a terse ceremony 64 years ago today at the border between North and South Korea, an armistice ended fighting in the Korean War.

The ceremony took 11 minutes, The Times reported. The signatories agreed to a cease-fire, but, the report noted, real peace remained elusive.

Under the deal, tens of thousands of American troops stayed in South Korea, many in the sprawling military base in central Seoul. Those soldiers, who for decades brought American food to the country, came to influence its cuisine.

The impact was most felt after the war, when food was scarce. Shrewd cooks mixed U.S. Army surplus supplies, such as Spam and hot dogs, with traditional ingredients, like kimchi —picy, pickled cabbage.

The product has since become the ultimate comfort food: budae jjigae (pronounced BUH-day CHEE-gay), or “ilitary stew.”

Some say the spicy, hearty soup can help cure anything from a cold to a hangover. Recipes vary, but little preparation is generally required: Add Spam slices, hot dogs, mushrooms, tofu, instant ramen and cheese to a pot of stock, and boil.

Flavor with chili paste, sugar, garlic and, of course, kimchi.

Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning. You can browse through past briefings here.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Staff Sgt. Ashlee Bruce of the U.S. Air Force. She is among those wondering whether she will be discharged after President Trump said on Wednesday that the military would no longer “ccept or allow”ransgender people to serve. | Nick Cote for The New York Times | Souhayla, a girl who escaped Islamic State captivity after three years, outside her uncle’ home in Shariya Camp, Iraq. | Alex Potter for The New York Times | The Burlington Center Mall in New Jersey. A recent report predicted that 20 to 25 percent of the more than 1,000 existing enclosed malls in the U.S. will close in the next five years. | Peter Garritano for The New York Times | “ know there are stereotypes: They eat cans and smell bad,” representative of the American Goat Society said. “hat’ not true.” Amy Lombard for The New York Times | Budae jjigae, a soup that has its roots in the aftermath of the Korean War. | Nicole Craine for The New York Times | For the adventurous and casual traveler alike, Michigan’ Upper Peninsula delivers the promise of unfettered tranquility. | By BRITTANY GREESON, JEAN YVES CHAINON and JOSHUA THOMAS 

Document NYTFEED020170727ed7r0035x
