World
U.S. Officials Fault Moscow on Syria Ahead of Tillerson Visit; Secretary of State expected to confront Russians on several thorny issues, including alleged election meddling

By Felicia Schwartz and Dion Nissenbaum 
1,152 words
10 April 2017
03:32
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—op U.S. officials dialed up their criticism of Moscow and blasted Syrian leader Bashar al-Assad Sunday, heightening tensions in advance of Secretary of State Rex Tillerson 's visit to Russia this week .

Mr. Tillerson said he would urge Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and other officials to rethink their support for Mr. Assad and to uphold Russia's commitments to ensure the elimination of Syria's chemical weapons stockpile following last week's attacks on civilians.

"Why Russia has not been able to achieve that is unclear to me," he said in an interview aired Sunday on ABC. "Clearly they've been incompetent, and perhaps they've just simply been out-maneuvered by the Syrians."

Nikki Haley, the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, speaking on CNN , said "regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria."

Mr. Tillerson will travel to Moscow this week to press Russia on why the Syrian regime was allowed to stockpile chemical weapons nearly four years after Washington and the Kremlin agreed on a plan to eliminate the weapons that put the responsibility for doing so on Moscow.

The U.S.-Russian dispute over Syria is but one of a series of difficult subjects Mr. Tillerson will bring up on a trip that was seen as a potential first step in a rapprochement between the two nations. He also is expected to confront the Russians about alleged election meddling in the U.S. and other Western countries and about its continuing intervention in Ukraine.

The friction over Syria seems to have further dimmed President Donald Trump 's hopes for improved ties and greater cooperation with Moscow. U.S. officials had raised expectations for a meeting between Mr. Tillerson and Russian President Vladimir Putin , but such a meeting remains unconfirmed by either side.

After Mr. Trump responded to a suspected Syrian chemical attack last week with a barrage of cruise missiles, the two powers are at sharp odds over the future of Mr. Assad.

Russia continued to stand by him, while top U.S. officials on Sunday outlined a process of "regime change" that would take place through diplomatic processes in the international arena or through elections, not necessarily by force.

Alongside the tougher U.S. line in Syria, the Trump administration flexed U.S. muscle elsewhere. The U.S. aircraft carrier Carl Vinson and other ships were redirected from planned port stops in Australia to the Korean Peninsula, amid concerns that Pyongyang was planning new weapons tests.

Following the U.S. strike on Syria, Russia said it was suspending a 2015 agreement with the U.S. on coordinating military operations. Later, however, Russian foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova said Moscow was open to dialogue with the U.S. and lawmakers, and said the attack wouldn't affect Mr. Tillerson's visit.

Before going to Moscow, Mr. Tillerson will stop for a meeting of the Group of Seven leading nations—he U.S., U.K., France, Germany, Japan, Canada and Italy—osted by Italy. G-7 member nations were largely supportive of the U.S. military action. Russia was ousted from the group in 2014 after moving to annex Ukraine's Crimea region.

U.S. policy on Mr. Assad has remained unclear despite the suspected chemical weapons attack last week, which killed at least 89 people, including many children. Just days before last week's U.S. strike, the White House signaled that it wasn't interested in removing Mr. Assad from power.

Now, the U.S. believes Russia's support to Mr. Assad has harmed overall ties and that further chemical attacks would be "very damaging to U.S.-Russian relations," Mr. Tillerson said.

Despite the U.S. airstrike on Syria, Ms. Haley, Mr. Tillerson and Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, Mr. Trump's national security adviser, said on Sunday news programs that the administration's main goal in the country remains the defeat of Islamic State .

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson said on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude that—nd it is going quite well —hen we hope to turn our attention to cease fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster, in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace, echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments.

Ms. Haley struck a tougher line on Mr. Assad, saying that he cannot remain the future leader of Syria, but she didn't veer sharply from the views of her administration colleagues, saying the U.S. can have "multiple priorities."

All three administration officials said that the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria, but seemed to point to diplomatic paths to Mr. Assad's eventual removal.

At the G-7 , Mr. Tillerson is likely to find a supportive reception. The U.S. airstrike has received "almost surprisingly strong public support," said James Jeffrey, a former deputy national security adviser in the George W. Bush administration. "That is going to box in the Russians significantly when they make their argument that this was illegal aggression," Mr. Jeffrey said.

Experts and former officials have said Mr. Tillerson could use the strike as leverage with Russia to rein in Mr. Assad or revive political talks. Russia might use the military-to-military channel it said it suspended last week as a bargaining chip as well.

"The Russians now can look at this and determine that this administration is very different than the previous one, that they're much more confident in using military force and that's part of the mix," said Andrew Tabler, a Syria expert at the Washington Institute.

Secretary of State John Kerry made various overtures to Russia to cooperate on Syria, beginning with the 2013 chemical weapons deal in which Syria agreed to give up its chemical weapons stock. He later sought cooperation with Russia against Islamic State in Syria if Moscow would ground Mr. Assad's air force and maintain a cease fire, but the deals fell apart quickly.

Ben Leubsdorf in Washington and Thomas Grove in Moscow contributed to this article.

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal  is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Capital Journal: Five Big Players Steer Trump's Foreign Policy 

* U.S. Officials Fault Moscow on Syria Ahead of Tillerson Visit 

* Democrats' Conditions for Tax Overhaul Make Bipartisan Deal Unlikely 

* Deputy National Security Adviser Kathleen McFarland Leaves White House 

* U.S. Hiring Freeze Stretching Federal Agencies 

* U.S. Says Goal in Syria Is to Defeat Islamic State 

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a000b6
