Politics
Donald Trump Considers Major Shake-up of Senior White House Team; Crisis in Syria has sharpened president's desire to cut some of the drama out of West Wing

By Carol E. Lee, Peter Nicholas and Michael C. Bender 
1,278 words
8 April 2017
01:07
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump is considering a major shake-up of his staff, a senior administration official said Friday, as he looks to build a more cohesive operation after a tumultuous start in the White House.

As he turned to the Syrian crisis that prompted the White House to adopt a war footing culminating in Thursday's missile strike, Mr. Trump was increasingly unhappy over the feuding that has run through the West Wing and is determined to see it end, the official said.

Mr. Trump is specifically evaluating whether to keep his chief of staff, Reince Priebus, and his chief strategist, Steve Bannon, in their current positions.

Two people close to the White House said Mr. Trump has been talking to confidants about Mr. Priebus's performance and has asked for names of possible replacements.

Mr. Trump is "trying out different names with his friends," one of those people said.

While Mr. Trump has made clear he has affection for Mr. Priebus, the chief of staff has emerged as a target because he is in overall command of a White House operation that has struggled.

Mr. Trump's approval ratings are in the low 40s, an all-out White House effort to pass a health-care overhaul fell short, and two executive orders barring certain travelers from entering the U.S. are tied up in court. Mr. Priebus has absorbed some of the blame for these early missteps.

Another top aide who could be removed or reassigned in a staff reshuffle is Mr. Bannon, a figure who represents an economic nationalist, "America first" perspective that was central to Mr. Trump's electoral victory, the other person said. Though that message resonates strongly with the president's core voters, Mr. Bannon has sparred both with Jared Kushner, the president's son-in-law and senior adviser, and with Gary Cohn, one of the president's top economic advisers.

Mr. Trump has privately questioned the performance of his aides in the past yet in the end left his staff intact. It is possible he could do that here, while sending a message that the infighting needs to stop.

Messrs. Kushner and Cohn spring from an internationalist, establishment wing that isn't a natural fit with Mr. Bannon's more pugnacious nationalism.

The Syrian strike also has elevated the influence of senior military officers in the administration. Those officers have been courting Mr. Kushner, who holds a broad portfolio of international assignments ranging from peace in the Middle East to preparations for the summit between Mr. Trump and Chinese President Xi Jinping at the Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida, which wrapped up Friday.

Continued infighting has "a very short life cycle," the administration official said, adding that the president is expected to make a decision soon.

Asked about possible staff changes, White House spokeswoman Lindsay Walters said such reports are "driven by people who want to distract from the success taking place in this administration." Citing Mr. Trump's military strike on a Syrian air base and other issues, she said: "The only thing we are shaking up is the way Washington operates as we push the president's aggressive agenda forward."

A senior staff shake-up could redefine a Trump presidency that has struggled in the early going, with a promised health-care overhaul collapsing last month in the House of Representatives. It also could reposition Mr. Trump as a more centrist figure to the degree that Mr. Bannon is marginalized while aides such as Mr. Cohn ascend, potentially opening an avenue to better relations with Democrats who have strongly opposed almost all of Mr. Trump's agenda.

Mr. Trump scored a major victory Friday, however, with the confirmation of his Supreme Court pick Neil Gorsuch, who will be sworn in next week.

Possible candidates for Mr. Priebus's job include Mr. Cohn, a former Goldman Sachs Group Inc. executive, people familiar with the matter said. It is also possible Mr. Trump would bring in an outsider, the people said. Mr. Cohn has told the president he would be an eager and able chief of staff, people familiar with the matter said.

Mr. Cohn said the reports about a shake-up are "completely false."

"Reince is leading our team effectively," Mr. Cohn said.

The prospect of a shake-up was reported Friday by Axios, an online news site.

The president himself at times has fueled the internal acrimony, according to people familiar with the matter. He started asking friends to rate the performance of his top aides following the failure in March to pass a health-care bill through the Republican-controlled House, the people said.

Mr. Bannon has been at Mr. Trump's side since August when he was brought in as part of the campaign's third leadership team. Mr. Bannon's allies say any internal battles he is involved in are over policy and the direction of the president's agenda.

He has tussled most frequently with Mr. Cohn, the people said. The two men, both with blue-collar backgrounds, have jockeyed over where they sit in meetings. But the bigger issue between them has been changes to the federal tax code and international trade, the people said.

Mr. Cohn has suggested the possibility of a carbon tax, which Mr. Bannon views as anathema to the "economic nationalism" that he infused into Mr. Trump's campaign, the people said. "Steve is willing to go to war on policy," one person said, adding he was determined to cede no ground to Mr. Cohn.

Mr. Bannon has also found himself on the opposite side of internal policy debates with Mr. Kushner, who encouraged his father-in-law to bring Mr. Bannon into the presidential campaign in the final months of the race.

The two worked closely during the campaign, and in the first days of the administration. When the president's team divvied up desks inside the White House, Messrs. Bannon and Kushner decided to take down a wall separating their two offices and replace it with a door.

One friend of Mr. Bannon said Mr. Trump would be wise to keep him in his current role, describing him as someone who will stay true to the insurgent, outsider spirit that drove the campaign.

"Steve Bannon has been the protector of the flame," said Pat Caddell, who served as a pollster for former President Jimmy Carter's 1976 campaign.

Still, Mr. Bannon's role has seemed narrower in recent days. He was removed earlier this week from the National Security Council. He was also intended to help lead an internal consultancy that relies on outside groups and business leaders to reshape the federal government. Now known as the Office of American Innovation, that project has just one boss: Mr. Kushner.

Eli Stokols and Jay Solomon contributed to this article.

Write to Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com, Peter Nicholas at peter.nicholas@wsj.com and Michael C. Bender at Mike.Bender@wsj.com

Read More

* Steve Bannon Removed From National Security Council

* Opinion: A Presidential Honeymoon From Hell

* With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message

* Trump's Syria Decision Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

* Jared Kushner Flies to Iraq for Briefing on Anti-\b ISIS\b0  Strategy (April 3)

* Ten Weeks In, Trump Has Racked Up Few Victories (April 1)

* President Trump's Advisers Made Big Money, Disclosures Show (March 31)

Document WSJO000020170407ed470070u
