Politics
McMaster Says Information Trump Shared With Russians Was 'Wholly Appropriate'; National security adviser says Trump didn't discuss Islamic State-controlled territories that weren't already publicly known

By Louise Radnofsky and Rebecca Ballhaus 
717 words
16 May 2017
22:48
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump's national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, said Tuesday that counterterrorism information that Mr. Trump shared in a meeting with Russian officials in the Oval Office last week "was wholly appropriate."             

"What the president discussed with the foreign minister was wholly appropriate to that conversation," said Gen. McMaster, in a briefing with White House reporters that had been set to focus on the president's coming first foreign trip. "It was wholly appropriate to share what the threat was in the context."             

Gen. McMaster would not discuss whether Mr. Trump discussed classified information to the Russian officials.              

Gen. McMaster said that the president "wasn't even aware of where this information came from. He wasn't briefed on the source."             

The Wall Street Journal reported  late Monday that Mr. Trump divulged details about Islamic State to the Russian foreign minister and ambassador in the meeting in a way that revealed enough information for them to potentially compromise the source of the intelligence, according to officials, who said the intelligence came from a U.S. ally.              

The Washington Post earlier reported that Mr. Trump shared sensitive information with the Russians and that it put intelligence relationships at risk, igniting a fresh firestorm in Washington.             

The intelligence Mr. Trump shared was provided to the U.S. by Israel, according to officials with direct knowledge of the matter. It came from a particularly valuable source of information about the Islamic State terrorist group's explosive-building ability, these officials said.                          

Mr.  Trump tweeted Tuesday morning that he had the "absolute right" to share counterterrorism information with Russian officials in an Oval Office meeting, fueling a rapidly escalating controversy over reports that he divulged sensitive intelligence obtained from an ally.             

"I have the absolute right" as president to share "facts pertaining to terrorism and airline flight safety," Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. He offered  an explanation why: "Humanitarian reasons, plus I want Russia to greatly step up their fight against ISIS & terrorism."              

In its articles Monday on the subject, the Journal refrained from identifying Israel as the source of the intelligence. Trump administration officials said disclosing it could damage the two countries' intelligence relationship and jeopardize operations. The Journal decided to name Israel once the country's name was widely disseminated after reports by the New York Times and others Tuesday afternoon.             

In the briefing, Gen. McMaster said Mr. Trump didn't discuss Islamic State-controlled territories that weren't already publicly known in his meeting with Russian officials.              

"It was nothing that you would not know from open-source reporting," Gen. McMaster said of the president's discussion with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov and Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak. "It had all to do with operations that are already ongoing have been made public for months."                           

Asked why White House homeland security adviser Tom Bossert had reportedly placed calls to the directors of the CIA and NSA after the meeting if Mr. Trump hadn't disclosed any sensitive intelligence, Mr. McMaster said he hadn't spoken with Mr. Bossert but that the adviser could have done so "out of an overabundance of caution." He said he and other officials at the meeting, including national security adviser for strategy Dina Powell, didn't feel that the conversation was "inappropriate."             

Gen. McMaster added that the president had "in no way compromised any sources or methods in this conversation."             

He said in response to a question that he was "not concerned at all" about the potential for relationships with U.S. allies to be in danger.             

                 Write to Louise Radnofsky at louise.radnofsky@wsj.com and Rebecca Ballhaus at Rebecca.Ballhaus@wsj.com