World
Le Pen Stripped of Immunity in  ISIS  Twitter Case; French presidential candidate's immunity from prosecution is waived over her tweeting of images of Islamic State executions

By Valentina Pop 
552 words
2 March 2017
19:04
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Marine Le Pen is the leader of France's National Front. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated she is head of the National Party. (March 2, 2017)

BRUSSELS—uropean lawmakers voted Thursday to strip French presidential candidate Marine Le Pen of her immunity from prosecution over her tweeting of images of Islamic State executions.

As a member of the European Parliament, Ms. Le Pen, the leader of France's far-right National Front, is exempt from prosecution. But French prosecutors requested a waiver last year after she tweeted three images in 2015 of Islamic State executions, including the beheading of U.S. journalist James Foley.

Under French law, disseminating violent imagery that can be seen by minors is a crime punishable by up to three years in prison and a fine of €5,000 ($78,850).

A "broad majority" of the European Parliament voted in Brussels to lift Ms. Le Pen's immunity, said Greek lawmaker Dimitrios Papadimoulis, a parliamentary vice president who presided over the vote.

Polish independent lawmaker Janusz Korwin-Mikke warned before the vote that lifting Ms. Le Pen's immunity would reap political benefits for her in France's elections this spring.

"She will get additional hundreds of thousands of votes. She will pose as persecuted by the bureaucracy and win the elections," he said.

Ms. Le Pen couldn't immediately be reached for comment. In response to angry reactions from the Foley family and French politicians immediately after the Islamic State-related tweets, she said that she was merely "showing the reality of Daesh"—n Arabic acronym for the militant group.

Thursday's vote in the European Union's legislature is likely to add fuel to claims by her supporters that the timing and substance of separate legal moves against her in France and in Brussels are politically motivated.

The latest polls place Ms. Le Pen ahead of all other candidates in the first round of voting on April 23, but they suggest she would lose the runoff two weeks later.

It wasn't the first time the European Parliament has taken such action against the 48-year-old Ms. Le Pen for controversial remarks.

In 2013, her parliamentary immunity was removed over her remarks at a rally in the city of Lyon comparing Muslims praying in the streets to wartime Nazi occupation.

In that case, the waiver request from France's justice ministry came when local prosecutors opened an investigation for incitement of racial hatred after an antiracism group filed a complaint against Ms. Le Pen for her comments. The case went to trial and she was acquitted in December 2015.

A third immunity-waiver request to European Parliament involving Ms. Le Pen is pending. It relates to a defamation case brought against her by the mayor of Nice, whom she accused in May 2015 of funding Islamic organizations in France.

Separately, French and EU authorities are investigating Ms. Le Pen for fraud and misuse of EU funds. No immunity waiver has been requested in those inquiries, a European Parliament spokeswoman said.

However, Ms. Le Pen's parliamentary salary was cut after she declined to repay €00,000 to the EU after an internal parliamentary inquiry found she had misused EU funds.

Write to Valentina Pop at valentina.pop@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170302ed32002bj
