World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Iraq's Murky Lesson For U.S. in Afghanistan

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
937 words
4 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As President Donald Trump 's administration weighs how to handle Afghanistan's chronic war, looming large is the question of what is the right lesson of the 2011 U.S. withdrawal from another conflict: Iraq.

Was it a strategic failure -- or a step that, over the long term and at significant cost, forced the Iraqis to assume responsibility for their own war? And if so, can this experience be replicated in Afghanistan?

In 2014, as Islamic State surged to the doorstep of Baghdad and the Iraqi army collapsed, it seemed to many that the American pullout was a catastrophic mistake that enabled international terrorism.

Now that reinvigorated Iraqi security forces have rolled back most of Islamic State's gains, this perspective isn't as clear-cut -- even taking into account the war's huge human toll.

After all, in the absence of American backup, Islamic State's existential threat forced a strong immune response from the Iraqi body politic.

The Popular Mobilization Forces that sprang up from Shiite militias in 2014, after a call to defend the homeland by top Iraqi Shiite cleric Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, stopped the extremist group's blitzkrieg.

Then, quarreling Iraqi political factions came together. The Kurdish regional government in the north ushered in unprecedented security cooperation with Baghdad and the rebuilt Iraqi army. Defeating Islamic State became an Iraqi rather than an American war.

"The American withdrawal put Iraqis in front of their own challenges and they realized that they have to resolve these problems on their own," said Iraqi lawmaker Dhiaa al-Assadi. Mr. Assadi heads a parliamentary bloc of supporters of Moqtada al-Sadr, a populist Shiite cleric whose militias used to fight U.S. troops before 2011.

True, the U.S. and other Western allies had to send troops back to Iraq, mostly in an advisory capacity, in 2014. They are, however, viewed very differently these days. Even the once-hostile Shiite militias consider them, however reluctantly, de facto allies.

So, as the White House debates its options in Afghanistan -- ranging from a significant troop increase to a full withdrawal -- to what extent are Iraq's experiences applicable to the Afghan conflict? Could the Afghan state, left to its own devices at least for a time, also transform the battle against the Taliban into a national and popular struggle?

The answer is, most likely, no. America's Afghan war, now 16 years long, is different from the Iraqi conflict in many crucial respects. And that is not just because Afghan President Ashraf Ghani , unlike Iraq's leader six years ago, wants an American military presence to continue for as long as possible.

While the Iraqi insurgency raged within the country's Sunni minority, Afghanistan's Taliban are drawn mostly from the country's dominant ethnic group, the Pashtuns.

And the Taliban keep advancing despite the presence of nearly 9,000 U.S. troops. While U.S. casualties in Afghanistan are relatively rare nowadays, they still occur: On Wednesday, the Pentagon said two U.S. troops died in Kandahar. Unlike oil-rich Iraq, Afghanistan can't pay for its own military and requires several billion dollars in Western assistance every year.

Add to this a political class that is even more corrupt and riven by infighting than the Iraqis in 2014, and it becomes clear that removing the American backstop would likely precipitate a rapid and inevitable collapse of the Afghan state, former and current Western officials say.

"Withdrawing and daring the Afghans to 'step up' when they cannot without U.S. support is a recipe for disaster," said James Cunningham, a former U.S. ambassador to Kabul and a nonresident fellow at the Atlantic Council think tank.

In Iraq, he added, "'victory' depended on circumstances that are particularly Iraqi and the destruction of a major city. The circumstances in Afghanistan are different and collapse of the government and reversion to chaos will not be easily reversed, if at all."

That is one of the reasons why America's North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies, even though many of them pressed for an end date to the Afghan military mission five years ago, have since accepted the open-ended deployment. That is especially so given the emergence of Islamic State's regional affiliate in parts of Afghanistan.

Compared with Afghanistan today, "Iraq was far more stable at the time of the U.S. withdrawal, and it still collapsed," said Vali Nasr, dean of the School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University and a former State Department adviser on Afghanistan. "Afghan national security forces don't look like they have the capacity to take on the Taliban and ISIS. They are losing ground even with U.S. troops there and will lose even more ground without U.S. troops."

While a military victory against the Taliban isn't in the cards anytime soon, the relatively small U.S. presence in Afghanistan prevents the fall of Kabul and other main cities. Considering the failure of past military surges to permanently alter the situation on the ground, such a stalemate may be the best possible outcome.

"The overall lesson in the region as a whole and its various parts is we can neither pivot out of it, nor go in massively to fix it definitively," said James Jeffrey, a former U.S. ambassador to Iraq who is a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy. "Rather, we have to deal with it on a long-term basis like a chronic illness."

Document AWSJ000020170803ed840000r
