U.S. News: U.S. Watch

451 words
11 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A2
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

HAWAII

Soldier Is Charged

With Helping ISIS

A U.S. soldier stationed in Hawaii has been charged with providing material support to Islamic State, according to a criminal complaint filed Monday in U.S. District Court in Honolulu.

Sgt. First Class Ikaika Kang, 34 years old, allegedly tried to support the terror group by passing along classified military documents to undercover FBI agents who he believed would give them to ISIS. He is accused of making combat training videos to be used to train ISIS fighters. He also allegedly contributed to the purchase of a drone that he believed would be used by ISIS.

An attorney representing Sgt. Kang didn't respond to requests for comment.

Sgt. Kang served in Iraq from March 2010 to February 2011, and in Afghanistan from July 2013 to April 2014, according to the complaint. He was most recently stationed at Schofield Barracks in Hawaii.

-- Zusha Elinson

---

ST. LOUIS

Troopers Deployed

To Quell Violence

Missouri's governor is making a push to combat violent crime in St. Louis, calling the Gateway to the West "the most dangerous city in the United States of America."

Republican Gov. Eric Greitens, a former Navy SEAL, deployed a group of state troopers to the city Sunday night. The initiative, announced Monday, is part of a 90-day pilot program to contribute more state law-enforcement resources to monitor St. Louis's major highways and free up the city's police units.

St. Louis had a murder rate of 59.3 per 100,000 residents last year, the highest among the 35 largest American cities, including Chicago and Baltimore, according to data from the FBI. Homicides have continued at that pace so far in 2017.

-- Quint Forgey

---

FLORIDA

Death Is 12th in U.S.

Linked to Air Bags

A man attempting to repair an old Honda Accord died last year when a Takata Corp. air bag installed inside the car ruptured, bringing to a dozen the U.S. death toll stemming from the faulty safety devices.

The man was attempting "unknown repairs" with a hammer inside the 2001 Accord with the ignition switch in the "on" position, triggering activation of the air bag and the subsequent explosion, Honda Motor Co. said Monday. Honda notified the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration of the fatality, which occurred in Hialeah, Fla., the auto maker said.

The defective air bags have been linked to at least 17 deaths globally. In the U.S. alone, regulators have said 19 auto makers will eventually recall 42 million vehicles with as many as nearly 70 million of the faulty devices.

-- Mike Spector

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170711ed7b00028
