Lens
Multimedia
The Times Sweeps Overseas Press Club Photo Awards

By JAMES ESTRIN 
779 words
21 March 2017
14:56
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

Recognizing “xceptional courage and enterprise,”he Overseas Press Club awarded its Robert Capa gold medal to Bryan Denton and Sergey Ponomarev of The New York Times for their coverage of the fight against ISIS and its aftermath.

The Times swept all three of the O.P.C.’ photography awards this year. Daniel Berehulak won the Oliver Rebbot Award for his coverage of murders of drug users in the Philippines who were targeted by President Rodrigo Duterte. The award for feature photography went to Meridith Kohut for her photo essay “nside Venezuela’ Crumbling Mental Hospitals.”n addition, Times photographer Tomá Munita received a special citation in the feature category for his poetic photographs of Cuba on the edge of change.

“e’e thrilled and honored for the recognition which validates the commitment that we have to in-depth photojournalism,”aid David Furst, the Times’ international photo editor. “’ particularly proud of the range of Times photography that was awarded and recognized this year —rave war photography from Sergey and Bryan; unflinching photography from Daniel Berehulak on the streets of the Philippines; sensitive, intimate photos of the change in Cuba from Tomá Munita; and Meridith Kohut’ definitive work on the downward spiral in Venezuela.”

During the final two weeks of the Fallujah offensive against ISIS, Mr. Denton said he covered “ellish”ighting in temperatures that soared to over 110 degrees.

“t was in Fallujah where I first got a little insight to the brutality not just of ISIS but of some of the popular mobilization units fighting ISIS and of the war in general,”aid Mr. Denton, who started photographing for The Times in 2006. “ understand the necessity to put an end to the human rights violations, war crimes and genocidal reign of ISIS. But at the same time, I do worry about how you demilitarize the population and stop this cycle of revenge that has maimed Iraq over the last decade and a half.”

Mr. Ponomarev also photographed the battle for Mosul, as well as several Christian villages that were liberated from ISIS’ rule. Covering the war against ISIS, he said, was different from other conflicts he has photographed because he could only work from one side, since ISIS has executed many journalists.

The photographers ad already been recognized by other organizations this year, including the World Press Photo Contest, Pictures of the Year International and the George Polk awards. Mr. Berehulak, who won a Pulitzer Prize in 2015 for his coverage f Ebola, said that awards could help re-focus the world’ attention on important stories, such as the state-sanctioned drug killings in the Philippines. His story, which he also wrote, was published by The Times in Filipino, Mandarin, Spanish and English.

Meridith Kohut has been based in Venezuela for eight years and has chronicled its economic and political collapse. She spent much of 2016 working with Times correspondent Nick Casey on a series of in-depth stories examining how the crisis affected people’ daily life. Mr. Casey and Ms. Kohut recently won a Polk award for those stories.

“e found doctors working in public hospitals that were similar to war zones with no antibiotics, no pain medicine and shortages of gauze and syringes,”s. Kohut said.

Ms. Kohut’ reporting led her to photograph psychiatric hospitals, including one on the outskirts of the town of Barquisimeto. She walked into a building overgrown with vegetation where the voices of “patients screaming in desperation”ould be heard. Because of an extreme shortage of psychiatric medicines, there was little treatment available for patients who were harming themselves or others.

“he only thing the doctors and nurses can do to protect them and the other patients is keep them in an isolation cell which looks like a very small jail cell with a barred window,”s. Kohut said.

The Times also received a citation for the Hal Boyle Award for “est newspaper, news service or digital reporting from abroad”or the series “ecrets of the Kingdom”y Ben Hubbard, Mark Mazzetti, Carlotta Gall, Scott Shane and Nicholas Kulish, and a citation for the Ed Cunningham Award for best magazine reporting on an international story for “ractured Lands,”y Scott Anderson.

When asked what the secret was to such consistently outstanding work, Michele McNally, the Times’ director of photography, was concise.

“ou take an incredibly talented group of photographers, put them on the most important stories, and let it run as long as it needs to!”

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.“

Document NYTB000020170321ed3l00001
