World News: Islamic State's 'Capital' Is Breached --- U.S.-backed forces advance into heavily fortified city in Syria, dealing blow to  ISIS 

By Noam Raydan and Maria Abi-Habib 
645 words
5 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

U.S.-backed Syrian forces breached the wall surrounding Raqqa's heavily fortified Old City, marking a significant advance in the battle to drive Islamic State out of a city it used to run its empire and plan attacks abroad, the American military said Tuesday.

The Syrian Democratic Forces made the breakthrough on Monday after the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State conducted airstrikes on the wall, according to the U.S. Central Command.

The Kurdish-led SDF fighters came under heavy fire as they entered, Central Command said.

The advance is the SDF's deepest yet into Raqqa. If the city falls, it would be one of the biggest achievements in about four years of war against Islamic State led by the Pentagon and its coalition of Western and Arab allies.

Although coalition forces have now entered Raqqa's Old City, Islamic State is still putting up very tough resistance, a coalition spokesman said, portending a drawn-out battle for the city.

The spokesman declined to say when Raqqa city might be completely recaptured.

But as coalition forces advance toward the city's more urbanized core, the fighting will likely become more protracted as it has when Islamic State has been uprooted in U.S.-backed military campaigns from Libya to Iraq.

"There is still tough fighting to be done," the coalition spokesman said. "ISIS fighters are putting up stiff resistance," he added, saying the militants have booby trapped the city and surrounding areas with explosives, making it slow going.

Islamic State has suffered a series of defeats in both Syria and Iraq that have eaten away at its territorial foothold in its core caliphate, or religious empire.

The group is all but banished from Mosul, Iraq -- the largest city it had captured in the Middle East -- after more than eight months of battles.

Some of the last remaining residents streamed out of Mosul's old city on Tuesday as Iraqi troops, backed by U.S. Special Forces, continued to inch forward.

The SDF, a mixed Kurdish and Arab force, launched the long-awaited offensive to retake Raqqa in early June, more than three years after Islamic State took the city that became known as its de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate in Syria. The U.S. has said that the militants used the area as a staging ground for terrorist attacks on Europe and that the loss of it would be a major blow to Islamic State.

Across Syria and Iraq, hundreds of U.S. Special Forces are supporting local partners, advising them in battle and calling in airstrikes.

Islamic State's key leadership has already moved on farther east to Deir Ezzour province, specifically to Mayadeen, a small city there. Oil-rich Deir Ezzour is still mostly in Islamic State hands and the group is expected to put up a tough fight there after the Raqqa and Mosul offensives are over.

Damascus and its allies, namely Iran, Russia and the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, are likely to take Islamic State's holdouts in Deir Ezzour, making the battle for Raqqa likely to be the last significant urban territory U.S.-allied forces will wrest away from Islamic State.

The extremist militants also still hold several strategically important towns in Iraq and a stretch of the Iraq-Syria border.

In Raqqa, Islamic State has used the Old City wall as a fighting position and planted mines and other explosives at several breaks in it, the U.S. military said. The military added that it was gauging airstrikes to try to preserve as much as possible of the historic 2,500-yard wall.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170705ed750000l
