World News: World Watch

596 words
28 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

NORTH KOREA

Pyongyang Fires

More Missiles

North Korea fired three short-range ballistic missiles off its east coast early Saturday, as U.S. and South Korean forces were conducting joint exercises on the peninsula and just days after Secretary of State Rex Tillerson had praised Pyongyang for exercising restraint.

The latest North Korean provocation comes as a rebuke to policy makers in Seoul and Washington, who have been making diplomatic overtures to dissuade Pyongyang from its quest for advancing nuclear-weapon and missile technology.

The missiles were launched from a site near the city of Wonsan, on the east coast, traveling to the northeast, according to U.S. Pacific Command, which tracked the launches.

Pacific Command spokesman Cmdr. Dave Benham said the first and third missiles traveled 155 miles to the northeast. His comments retracted an initial assessment that those two missiles had failed in flight.

-- Kwanwoo Jun

---

PHILIPPINES

Teen's Burial Becomes

Anti-Duterte Protest

A Filipino teenager at the center of the latest outcry against the president's bloody crackdown against illegal drugs was buried, with mourners turning his funeral into a protest against thousands of drug killings.

Hundreds of mourners and left-wing activists on Saturday carried placards that read "Stop killing the poor" and "Justice for Kian" during a kilometers-long (miles-long) funeral march before Kian Loyd Delos Santos was interred at a public cemetery in the Manila metropolis.

The 17-year-old student, who wanted to become a police officer, was one of more than 80 drug and crime suspects killed in purported gunbattles with police over three days this month in the bloodiest few days of President Rodrigo Duterte's antidrug campaign. The killings sparked alarm and official investigations.

At a funeral Mass, Roman Catholic Bishop Pablo David urged authorities to "stop the killings and start the healing."

-- Associated Press

---

AFGHANISTAN

ISIS Attacks Mosque;

At Least 20 Killed

Suspected Islamic State fighters attacked a Shiite Muslim mosque in Kabul, triggering an hourslong gunbattle with government security forces that left at least 20 people dead and 40 wounded.

This attack came a day after the top U.S. commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John Nicholson, said Islamic State was being crushed in its eastern Afghan stronghold in Nangarhar province.

Friday's violence erupted when three gunmen opened fire on two police officers guarding the mosque, in northern Kabul, and fought their way inside, Interior Ministry spokesman Najib Danish said.

-- Ehsanullah Amiri

---

MYANMAR

Thousands Flee

Rohingya Clashes

Myanmar's government said it had evacuated at least 4,000 non-Muslim villagers amid ongoing clashes in northwestern Rakhine state, as thousands more Rohingya Muslims sought to flee across the border to Bangladesh on Sunday.

The death toll from the violence that erupted on Friday with coordinated attacks by Rohingya insurgents has climbed to 104, the vast majority militants, plus 12 members of security forces and several civilians, according to a Reuters tally based on official releases.

-- Reuters

---

TENNIS

Andy Murray Drops

Out of U.S. Open

The U.S. Open lost another star on Saturday, when Andy Murray said his hip wasn't well enough to compete.

Murray, the 30-year-old second seed, won the U.S. Open in 2012 and excels on hard courts. But this season has been a trying one for him in terms of injuries.

Murray said he had hoped that his time off this summer -- he hadn't played since Wimbledon -- would be enough rest, but he said the pain hadn't subsided.

-- Tom Perrotta

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170827ed8s0001b
