National Desk; SECTA
Polk Awards Honor Work From the Campaign Trail

By WINNIE HU 
830 words
20 February 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A Washington Post reporter who brought to light a video of Donald J. Trump making lewd comments about women and a ProPublica reporter who covered the Trump campaign's growing traction with voters in a tumultuous election year were among the winners of the George Polk Awards in Journalism for 2016, announced on Sunday.

''We've seen fake news, trite news, disinformation campaigns and charges of biased coverage,'' said John Darnton, the curator of the Polk Awards.

But in a nod to this year's Polk winners, Mr. Darnton said there were also bright spots. ''A vibrant press continues to inform, expose, tell the truth and occasionally fill us all with outrage at injustice,'' he said.

Journalists representing a dozen news organizations were recognized in 14 categories in the awards, which are administered by Long Island University in honor of George Polk, a CBS News correspondent who was murdered in 1948 while covering the civil war in Greece. Journalists for The New York Times won three of the awards, the most of any organization, and Washington Post journalists won two awards.

David A. Fahrenthold of The Washington Post won the political reporting award for an investigation of Mr. Trump that raised questions about his charitable giving and exposed the video in which he bragged about making sexual advances on women, a video that, as the Polk announcement noted, ''shaped our national political conversation.''

Alec MacGillis of ProPublica received the national reporting award for his dispatches about support for Mr. Trump and a postelection analysis, ''Revenge of the Forgotten Class.''

Craig Harris of The Arizona Republic won the award for state reporting for investigating the firings of Arizona state employees -- the majority of whom were found to be older workers -- as part of an effort to shrink the state government.

Darwin BondGraham and Ali Winston of the East Bay Express in California won for local reporting for exposing a sex scandal within the Oakland Police Department, in which officers not only exploited an underage sex worker but also leaked information about undercover prostitution stings.

In the foreign reporting category, Nicholas Casey and Meridith Kohut of The New York Times won for their portrayal of the effects of Venezuela's economic crisis on public health, in hospitals without basic necessities where infants lay dying and mental institutions without enough medicine for patients.

The International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, a global network of more than 190 journalists who collaborate on articles, won the financial reporting award for ''The Panama Papers.'' From a trove of leaked documents about a Panamanian law firm, they pieced together a picture of a rogue offshore finance industry linked to money laundering and other illegal activities.

Daniel Berehulak of The New York Times won the photojournalism award for ''They Are Slaughtering Us Like Animals,'' a photo essay on the dozens of killings he witnessed on the streets of Manila as part of the Philippines' campaign against drugs.

The sports reporting award went to Rebecca R. Ruiz of The New York Times for revealing that a Russian state-run doping program for athletes had swapped test samples and engaged in a cloak-and-dagger scheme at the 2014 Winter Olympics.

The Washington Post journalists Lenny Bernstein, Scott Higham and David Fallis won for medical reporting for disclosing that the pharmaceutical industry and its lawyers had hired dozens of officials from the Drug Enforcement Administration after that agency moved to curb a rising opioid epidemic.

Brian M. Rosenthal of The Houston Chronicle won the award for education reporting for exposing a longstanding Texas policy that denied special education services to schoolchildren.

The award for justice reporting went to Christie Thompson of The Marshall Project and Joseph Shapiro of National Public Radio for reporting on a widespread practice in state and federal prisons of doubling up inmates in solitary confinement. Some of those inmates attacked or killed their cellmates.

Anand Gopal, a journalist and author, won the award for magazine reporting for ''The Hell After ISIS'' in The Atlantic, which tells the struggles of one Iraqi family caught between Islamic State terrorists and United States-backed forces.

A team from KARE 11 in Minneapolis -- A. J. Lagoe, Steve Eckert and Gary Knox -- won the award for television reporting for their series ''Invisible Wounds.'' They found that the Department of Veterans Affairs had used unqualified doctors to examine veterans for traumatic brain injuries and deny benefits.

Robert Lewis of WNYC won the award for radio reporting for disclosing that some New York Police Department officials had earned substantial incomes from outside deals and jobs that appeared to be in conflict with department interests.

Anna Deavere Smith won the Polk Career Award. Ms. Smith is an educator, playwright and actress who explores issues such as ethnic conflict and urban riots.

The documentary film award went to Nanfu Wang for ''Hooligan Sparrow,'' about the Chinese women's rights activist Ye Haiyan.

Document NYTF000020170220ed2k00037
