World
Syrian City With Two Regimes Awaits Day of Reckoning; Kurds in Qamishli expect crackdown by Damascus after years of wartime coexistence

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,119 words
16 October 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

QAMISHLI, Syria—his northern city has long been an anomaly where the Syrian regime and a rival Kurdish administration—ot quite allies and not quite enemies—oexist while the country's multisided war rages around them.

But now the government in Damascus is ascendant, having clawed back from the brink of defeat to decimate rebel forces and regain swaths of territory from a weakened Islamic State. Kurds who have made Qamishli a base for the semiautonomous region they have carved out across much of northern Syria during the yearslong conflict say they know the day is near when the regime will try to retake the entire city.

"The regime still dreams of pre-2011 and thinks it will return to fully control Syria. But that is not realistic," said Abdulkarim Omar, a leader of the Kurdish administration who is based in Qamishli. "We are sure if the regime gets a chance to breathe, then it will come after us."

A mixed city of Kurds, Arabs and Assyrians, Qamishli is the undeclared capital of the Kurdish semi-autonomous region. After parliamentary elections scheduled for early 2018, the administration plans to declare it a capital, said Mr. Omar— move that could further raise tensions with the regime of President Bashar al-Assad.

Every few blocks in Qamishli, there is a photo of Mr. Assad, a statue of his late father with arm raised in a wave, or banners showing the Syrian leader in military uniform with the vow: "We pledge allegiance forever."

These monuments are a constant reminder to the Kurds that the regime will eventually come for them.

Qamishli residents live between the two administrations and get taxed or billed for utilities by both sides. They sometimes even get ticketed by both authorities for the same traffic infraction.

"People are lost between the two sides," said a lawyer who spends his days shuttling between two courthouses that represent the parallel legal systems.

In the early years of the uprising, the Syrian government and its army mostly withdrew from Kurdish-majority areas in the northeast, including Qamishli. It was an effort to appease the Kurds—ho had been denied many basic rights such as getting a passport—nd prevent them from joining the rebels. As a result, the regime and the main Kurdish militia have rarely battled each other.

The Kurdish administration made a point of taking over government buildings here to signal it is the new authority in this city on the Turkish border, an important economic hub in Syria's east. There are no certain estimates for the current population; one local official said there could be as many as 750,000 people living here.

The long-term survival of the Kurdish region in Syria depends on the continued U.S. presence in the area, residents and officials say. But the U.S. has long denied that it is enabling the creation of the region, and the Trump administration has made clear its interests in Syria don't extend beyond fighting Islamic State.

"Our overall mission…s to defeat ISIS" and nothing more, State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said in August. She was responding to comments by the U.S.-backed and Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, which claimed the U.S. would maintain a presence in Syria for decades.

For now, the U.S. maintains a passing presence in Qamishli, sending truckloads of weapons and armored vehicles through the city's streets to allied Kurdish and Arab forces fighting Islamic State in Raqqa about 170 miles west.

Last month's independence referendum in the autonomous Kurdistan region of neighboring Iraq prompted a political crisis that escalated Monday into clashes between Kurdish and Iraqi forces, which until recently were allied against Islamic State. The move toward independence by Iraqi Kurds has also united regional governments—any of which have their own restive Kurdish populations—hat are opposed to these aspirations.

Syria's more than six-year conflict has been characterized by divided cities controlled by warring parties. In contested cities such as Aleppo and Homs, front lines were marked by sandbags and charred vehicles.

In Qamishli, however, control changes across unseen lines. Battle is conducted more often through competing legal systems than through violence, with each government trying to assert its authority by promulgating rules and regulations.

Drivers must choose license plates issued by either the regime or the Kurdish administration; some favor regime licenses, fearing vehicles without them will be confiscated when Damascus takes control.

Regime traffic police patrol certain roundabouts and streets, issuing parking tickets or stopping men wanted for military service.

Local journalist Jawan Tatar said he was in a taxi once going to run an errand when he suddenly found himself on a street controlled by the regime. He had done two years of mandatory military service but was still wanted for reserve duty.

"I got scared," he said. "I told the taxi driver to drive the wrong way just to get away."

Despite its limited control of Qamishli, the regime has continued to assert its dominance as only a central government can.

A university professor living in the city said one of his relatives was prevented from boarding a plane at Qamishli airport, which is under regime control, because he hadn't paid his utility bills to the regime.

The central government has also withheld salaries for men who have ignored military draft notices.

The regime's courthouse is the only place to officially register births, marriages and deaths. All real-estate transactions and inheritances must be registered with the regime, giving it another advantage in the power struggle.

Even legal decisions reached in the Kurdish administration's courthouse must be registered in the regime courthouse.

"We go to the administration for services and we go to the regime for legal issues," said the lawyer who shuttles between courthouses.

But the Kurdish administration doesn't have any legitimacy beyond its own borders. Attempts at gaining recognition from foreign states have failed.

Though the shared control over Qamishli has been mostly peaceful for years, bloody clashes have broken out on occasion. With two increasingly emboldened sides vying for control, the prospect of an enduring peace seems doubtful.

The Syrian government "will not sacrifice even a hair's breadth" of territory, Deputy Foreign Minister Faisal Mekdad said in August ahead of local elections held by the Kurdish administration, according to state media. "Those dreamers should abandon any more diabolical dreams because that would lead to more killing and more bloodshed."

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171016edag001gx
