World News: Iraq Forces Take Islamic State Stronghold --- Militants are cleared from Tal Afar, once a way station between Mosul and Raqqa

By Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
988 words
28 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Iraqi forces have driven Islamic State from the town of Tal Afar, the Iraqi military said Sunday, clearing one of the extremist group's few remaining strongholds in the country.

Operations continued against the militants in a handful of surrounding villages, a military statement said. Army officials had said Saturday night they were nearly in full control of Tal Afar's historic center, moving toward the northern neighborhoods still held by Islamic State.

The surprisingly swift conclusion on Sunday came just one week into the battle for Tal Afar, which once served as a way station between the group's de facto capitals Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria.

As U.S.-backed Iraqi forces penetrated Tal Afar, it became clear Islamic State fighters either had abandoned the city ahead of the battle to seek refuge elsewhere, or had laid down their weapons to blend in with the local population, according to Iraqi military officials. While the militants fought back, their challenge was weaker than expected, the officials said.

"It looks like Iraq isn't [any longer] a priority [for Islamic State]," said Rasha al-Aqeedi, a researcher at Al Mesbar Studies and Research Center, a Dubai think tank focused on Islamic movements. "They're losing and have lost their veteran networks. The fighters probably won't stay in Iraq to defend their remaining networks, they're not strong enough to fight for. They'll opt to stay underground instead."

Al Qaeda in Iraq resurfaced in 2013, morphing into Islamic State. The Sunni Muslim militant group seized about one-third of Iraq's territory in a summer 2014 blitz, establishing its caliphate across Iraq and Syria. It since has carried out attacks across the Middle East and Europe.

Despite being uprooted from most of the territory it controlled over the past two years, Islamic State has been able to rely on a mix of operatives and supporters with no connection to the group, inspired to carry out attacks.

One of the last large, strategic Iraqi towns under Islamic State control is Hawijah, in the oil-rich province of Kirkuk. It is likely to be the next offensive for the Iraqi military and the U.S.-led coalition that is providing support, according to Iraqi military statements.

The group's remaining resources in Iraq are concentrated heavily along the border with Syria.

Military spokesman Brig. Gen. Yahya Rasool credited the experience of the battle-hardened Iraqi military in retaking Mosul -- a nine-month-long operation that ended in July -- for the victory in Tal Afar. The strategy of surrounding and cutting off Tal Afar for nearly a year also contributed to the swift victory by severing Islamic State supply routes while U.S.-led coalition airstrikes helped destroy important targets, he added. Some 200,000 people were living in Tal Afar as of June 2014.

Meanwhile, in Lebanon, a separate battle against the extremist group, also launched a week ago, was coming to a surprisingly quick conclusion as well, marking the likely end of the terror network's hold in that country. The army, which is fighting to expel Islamic State from its foothold there, on Sunday announced a cease-fire with the extremist group.

The military is using the cease-fire to negotiate an end to its fight against Islamic State by expelling the remaining militants to the eastern Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, which is still largely in control of Islamic State. Their removal was expected to come in exchange for the retrieval of the bodies of eight Lebanese soldiers kidnapped and killed by the extremists in 2014.

Deir Ezzour is quickly becoming Islamic State's last stronghold in its self-styled caliphate, as its fighters and leadership converge there from Iraq and other parts of Syria -- and now, Lebanon. The Syrian Democratic Forces, a U.S.-backed group led by Kurdish militants, on Friday announced they would begin an offensive on Deir Ezzour "very soon," according to local media reports.

---

For ISIS, a Trail

Of Lost Ground

---

The group has been driven

from its urban redoubts

over the past several years

A timeline of major urban victories against Islamic State in Iraq, including Sunday's in Tal Afar.

Mar. 31, 2015: Tikrit falls to Iraqi forces, Islamic State's first major loss in Iraq and biggest setback since seizing swaths of territory across Iraq and Syria in 2014. Fighting for the city, symbolic as the birthplace of former dictator Saddam Hussein, takes three months.

Nov. 13: Iraqi Kurdish fighters stream into Sinjar after announcing its retaking from the extremist group. The battle for the northern city is a then-rare victory against Islamic State in Iraq and involves some 7,500 Kurdish forces backed by the U.S.

Dec. 28: Iraqi forces declare victory in Ramadi, the capital of Anbar province. Fleeing residents describe near-starvation and use as human shields.

June 26, 2016: Fallujah is declared liberated by Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi. The city, once used as a staging ground by Islamic State, is widely seen as a test of the army's preparedness for a coming battle to retake the much larger city of Mosul.

July 11, 2017: Islamic State's Iraqi stronghold Mosul, the country's largest city, is declared liberated by Mr. Abadi. The more than nine-month battle triggers an epic humanitarian crisis, as hundreds of thousands of residents are displaced.

Aug. 27: Tal Afar, the militants' last key Iraqi redoubt and a former transit point between Mosul and Raqqa, falls after just one week of fighting. Iraqi military officials cite for the swift victory factors including Islamic State's depleted resources.

-- Karen Leigh

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170828ed8s0000p
