Briefing
G-20, Penn Station, Tesla: Your Friday Briefing

By MARK A. WALSH 
1,277 words
7 July 2017
11:32
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•-20 leaders gather in Germany …

The long-awaited first meeting between President Trump and President Vladimir Putin of Russia took place this morning on the sidelines of the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, and in Moscow’ view, the U.S. was likely to come out looking weaker.

We have a team of reporters and a photographer on the ground. Get the latest updates in our live briefing.

Mr. Trump and Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany held a low-key meeting Thursday night, and the handshakes, at least, went well. Ms. Merkel knows she has to deal with the American leader, the question is: How?

Protests in Hamburg turned violent Thursday night, and up to 100,000 people are expected to participate in further demonstrations today. New York City’ mayor, Bill de Blasio, is there.

•…fter Trump’ warm welcome in Poland .

President Trump  said in Warsaw on Thursday that Western civilization was at risk of decline, and under threat from “adical Islamic terrorism”nd “he creep of government bureaucracy.”

He also held up Poland as a beacon of freedom, but international rights groups disagree.

• new approach on North Korea .

As the country’ missile program progresses, small civilian satellites in the U.S. could help track missiles that Pyongyang launches. The devices were developed to count cars in Target parking lots and to monitor crops.

Amid the posturing on the Korean Peninsula, the South has made a conciliatory gesture, calling for cross-border family reunions.

•ore transportation troubles.

A New Jersey Transit train derailed as it entered Pennsylvania Station on Thursday night, causing another round of delays but no major injuries.

The episode came just days before major repairs begin at the transit hub. Here are our suggestions for alternative routes.

•n agreement in Illinois.

After more than two years of political sparring, missed payments and plunging credit ratings, the state finally did what most do every year: It finished a budget.

•o escape, and little chance of surrender.

Our correspondent went with the Iraq counterterrorism force to the old city of Mosul, where Islamic State fighters are hemmed in and civilians are trapped.

The resistance was fierce and fanatical, even by ISIS standards.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

Donald Trump’ life and career have been defined by his legal battles. But what will they mean for his presidency?

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•.S. employers added 222,000 jobs in June, more than expected. The jobless rate edged up to 4.4 percent.

• he European Union’ trade agreement with Japan is a rebuke of President Trump’ policies. Here’ what’ in it, and why it matters.

•rance has pledged to phase out the sale of cars that use fossil fuels by 2040. Tesla, though, has lost its spot as the most valuable U.S. automaker.

•ean Baquet, The Times’ executive editor, answered readers’uestions about plans to eliminate a stand-alone copy desk.

•.S. stocks were down on Thursday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

•Instagram can harm body image —ut it can also inspire us.

•ong-term travel requires letting go of expectations and plans. Here are our tips.

• Sicilian cook shares a recipe for baked eggplant with ricotta, mozzarella and anchovy.

Noteworthy

•eaming up.

In today’ 360 video, admire a project in which 12 pairs of artists communicated with each other for five months using only visual tools.

• culture of brutality.

The death of a Muslim recruit at Parris Island has raised questions about severe hazing at the U.S. military boot camp.

• iny building blocks.

Researchers at CERN have spotted a particle that could provide insight into how quarks interact.

•eady for the weekend.

At the movies, we have reviews of “The House,”“The Beguiled”nd the documentary “City of Ghosts.”e also spoke with Oscar Isaac, who is returning to the theater to play Hamlet.

For book lovers, we have a piece in praise of Daphne du Maurier, and take a look at a thriller, “The Sisters Chase.”

On the music scene, our writer spent time with Haim, a rock band very much devoted to being a rock band.

•uotation of the day.

“here isn’ much more I could accomplish at the Office of Government Ethics, given the current situation.”

Walter M. Shaub Jr., the director of the agency, who is stepping down to take a job with an advocacy group.

•est of late-night TV .

This feature will be back on Tuesday. The hosts are taking a break.

Back Story

In the U.S. Supreme Court’ 227-year history, only four women have served on its bench (three of them currently). On this day in 1981, President Ronald Reagan followed up on a campaign promise to appoint the first, announcing that he would nominate Sandra Day O’onnor.

Reaction was swift. “lready the flack is starting & from my own supporters,”r. Reagan wrote in his diary. “ think she’l make a good Justice.”

Viewed as a centrist and moderate conservative, she became a swing vote in decisions upholding voting rights, environmental protection, affirmative action and religious liberty.

Justice O’onnor, born in 1930, graduated third in her class from Stanford Law School. Yet the only position offered to her was legal secretary. She declined.

“t wasn’ until the ’0s that women began to bring to the forefront the continuing concerns that they had about equal opportunity,”she told The Saturday Evening Post in 1985, adding, “ am sure that but for that effort, I would not be serving in this job.”

While she never marched for women’ rights, that didn’ stop scholars from analyzing her feminist credentials.

Does she call herself a feminist? No. She prefers to be called “ fair judge and a hard worker.”

Danielle Belopotosky contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.

Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany welcomed President Trump to the Group of 20 summit meeting in Hamburg, Germany, this morning. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Travelers at Pennsylvania Station on Thursday, after a derailment caused delays. | Caitlin Ochs for The New York Times | Members of the Iraqi counterterrorism service in Mosul on Thursday. They have to be especially vigilant because some Islamic State militants have gotten a hold of Iraqi soldiers’niforms. | Ahmad Al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | Marine Corps recruits pausing between drills at Parris Island, S.C. There have been reports of severe hazing at the base, far more than at other U.S. military boot camps. | Robert Clark for The New York Times | Sandra Day O’onnor in 1981. | George Tames/The New York Times | The Metropolitan Museum of Art commissioned 12 artists, paired together, to communicate using visuals for five months. Two paired artists discuss their experiences in this 360 video. | By JEAN YVES CHAINON, TIM CHAFFEE and SAMANTHA QUICK 

Document NYTFEED020170707ed77002bd
