The Public Editor
Public Editor
The Future of the Times: A View From the Top

By LIZ SPAYD 
2,409 words
7 January 2017
20:59
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WITH The New York Times facing another year of rapid-cycle innovation and a big political story in Washington, I sat down with the executive editor, Dean Baquet, to see how he believes readers might feel the impact.

There’ a highly anticipated internal report due out soon that will set the future path for New York Times innovation. How do you suppose forthcoming changes will actually affect readers? Will new features be added? Or current ones eliminated? Will The Times tell stories in ways it doesn’ now?

I think readers will continue to see more exploration of ways to tell stories, a continuing emphasis on video and multimedia online, and more of an effort in which we acknowledge the phone is a completely different medium than print. We’e going to think harder about how we’e going to edit The New York Times. Trying to edit The Times the way we edited it in a purely print era is unreasonable. The layers of editing, the number of people who touch a story. The fact is that we now write so much more. Right now, as we talk, there’ a hearing on Russian hacking. I’e been in meetings all day, but we’e probably written 10 posts. All of those posts, and the large print stories done at the end of the day, cannot be edited in the same way. The challenge is how to still be fast and give people a story in a form that is accurate. But it’ hard. If we succeed, readers won’ notice most of these editing changes.

Also, I think people will see more changes in the print New York Times. We just redesigned Culture. I’ not sure yet what redesigns of other sections of The New York Times will look like, but we’e looking at how we produce the print New York Times.

Are they going see less space devoted to m etro coverage?

I’ not being coy. I don’ think so, if you think past the actual desks. I think of Metro as everything from local investigative reporting, which we do a lot of, to local culture reporting, which we do a lot of, to local business reporting, which we do a lot of. So I’ not sure people will see the word “ew York”ppear less in The New York Times. I think they will see less —nd I have already seen less —ncremental New York news coverage.

We did a story a few days ago that said we don’ have a reporter in New Jersey right now. Look, I wish we had the resources to have what we used to have in New Jersey and Connecticut, but the reality is that we don’. And I think to do the window dressing of having one reporter running around doesn’ quite make it. I think we have to try to figure out how to cover stories that resonate for the whole region, which is why you see more transportation coverage. I think you will always see The Times deeply invested in covering the mayor and governor of New York. I have no intention of pulling back any of that coverage. But I think you will see less incremental coverage of New York, without question.

You’e spoken about buyouts and other newsroom cuts. How might those impact readers? Will readers be notified if favorite bylines move on, one subscriber asks?

That’ interesting, I hadn’ thought of that. We will have a smaller newsroom but I don’ know what that means yet because there’ so many factors. Print advertising, which was one of the things that most sustained our newsroom, and all newsrooms, for a long time is dropping significantly —nd more this year than ever before. The election of Donald Trump also changes the calculation, for example. We went from three to six people covering the White House. We have to think harder about how we cover agencies in Washington, because it’ going to undergo a dramatic transformation. My goal is to keep as many people as we can whose work is to gather news. Who write stories, cover the world, take video.

Mark Thompson, the C.E.O., recently raised the possibility that The Times could reach 10 million digital subscribers, which could really be a game changer in supporting your journalistic ambitions. Is that a number pulled out of a hat or do you think it’ realistic, and if so by when?

Well, I don’ know by when, but I certainly did not expect the dramatic rise in subscriptions that The New York Times has seen. I don’ think the industry’ seen anything like it —nd that was before Trump. I remember going to a celebration not that long ago when we crossed a million. And that seemed like such an elusive, big thing. And if we have more years like the year we just had, I don’ think that’ [10 million] unreasonable. I don’ know when that will be, but it’ not unreasonable. And, by the way, we’e just starting our international expansion, because most of our audience is still domestic. I think that there’ a big audience for New York Times coverage; I think a lot of people don’ know what we do. It’ always surprising when we talk to readers —hey don’ know how much video we do. We did an experiment in which we showed them some foreign coverage —nd readers assumed it was Vice. We do more adventurous foreign reporting than anybody in the world. Oddly enough for an institution that people think of as overconfident sometimes, we’e not that good at tooting our own horn.

I did a call-out to readers earlier this week asking what questions they had for you. Many, not surprisingly, asked about politics. They seem to be in two camps. One complains that opinion is bleeding into news stories. Another worries that The Times will “ormalize”rump and fall prey to his manipulations. Does one of these sides better represent your concern?

I think this is an extraordinary presidency. And the reason that we’e putting more energy into covering it is not because we have this goal of taking Donald Trump down. It is because he literally has placed people in positions of power who by the standards of Washington, whether you like them or not —nd I’ using this as a neutral word —re revolutionary figures. The secretary of state is unlike any we have ever had. He ran the biggest corporation in the world. The head of the E.P.A. doesn’ necessarily think we should have an E.P.A. So this is an extraordinary moment in the life of Washington. And we will cover that very, very aggressively.

I do not believe that opinion has seeped into the pages of The New York Times. I think some who think that do so because of my decision to use the word “ie”in stories that refer to Trump’ bolder falsehoods]. Some of it is, to be frank, because some of our competitors have accused us of that and I think that resonates with people. I really don’ buy it and we work really, really hard to not do it.

Our writing is more relaxed than it used to be —hat’ intentional. I actually think some newspaper writing of a generation ago was too stilted, was too hard to follow, too hard to understand. And I think that I’e tried really hard to push us to loosen up language. I think there was something elitist about coverage of Congress 25 years ago that assumed people knew how a bill became a law. And I think the one thing we’e been smacked in the head with in recent years is that people don’ understand that stuff. And the most non-elitist thing we can do is to assume people don’ understand it. To relax a bit in forms of storytelling, to tell people when we witness things and observe things. To be transparent. Of course, does that mean that sometimes we may have slipped in way I wish we hadn’? Yes, of course. But I think the alternative, which was to keep telling stories in this sort of made-up newspaper language that I grew up on, I don’ think that’ a good alternative.

But do you think reporters and editors at times inject opinion?

You and I could probably go through The Times every day and come up with a couple examples where they do. But I think mostly they don’.

Another political question from a reader, on the topic of Trump’ crack-of-dawn tweets: “or the love of God, can The Times stop treating Trump’ tweets as front-page news?”n essence, plenty of readers ask, why does The Times give so much attention to his tweets, even some that are misleading or inaccurate?

I think we need to devise a way to more quickly put them in perspective and call them out, if they’e exaggerated, and more quickly try to figure out their meaning. But I don’ think we could get away with not covering them. He’ the president of the United States. They’e not press releases. They’e his utterances at six o’lock in the morning. You wanna talk about a slippery slope? Picture the scene: six o’lock in the morning, The Times looks at a tweet he makes about ISIS, and we say, “h, that one doesn’ feel important, we don’ believe him.”hat’ more injecting opinion into coverage than an occasional slip in language.

I agree. If he’ going to tweet, like when he chastised his own Republican Congress this week, how is that not news? Context is important, but so is how he wields influence.

And learning how to balance them. It’ a new phenomenon. And making sure his tweets don’ necessarily set the cycle of the day if they’e not important. But not covering them, I don’ think that’ an alternative.

My job, of course, is to serve as an advocate for the reader, watching out for violations of sound journalistic practices. So I wanted to ask you, in looking back at 2016, is there an occasion where you think The Times failed its readers, or where you’ love a do-over?

I still think I’e got to figure out a way to get a better handle on the staff’ use of social media. I think that’ an issue for us. I don’ think there’ a way around it. Not just for us but for everybody. I think there’ a tension between wanting journalists to interact with the public and not wanting them to take it too far, which we didn’ used to have when I was a young reporter. I remember being a reporter for The Times-Picayune and when a reader called I’ just hang up on them. That’ not good. On the other hand we have to have ways that allow people to communicate without a filter and figure out how to do that in social media.

What does that mean, though? That your reporters are crossing over the line?

I think sometimes reporters and editors go over the line. Or are a little ham-handed in their language in a way they wouldn’ be in the pages of The Times. And I think people think that’ easy to police. It’ not. I want people to interact with readers. I want reporters and editors interacting with the wider world. But I think we sometimes cross the line, and we need to figure out a way to not do that.

If I had a do-over it would be about anger in the country —hat we, the press, did not quite have a handle on during the election. The good thing about being an editor of a news organization is that you get a do-over. You just say: We’e going to do it better from now on. I think we struggle because of our location in New York. I’e asked the national desk and others to get better at countering that. Also, it is unfortunate that with the weakening of local news organizations, the most powerful and significant news organizations in America are in New York and Washington. That means whole parts of the country don’ get the best coverage that would help us understand the rest of the country.

Finally, I wanted to end on the role of the reader in today’ media environment. Do readers have more power than they used to have to influence decisions editors make at The Times? Or how has their role changed?

The reader has far more power than ever before —nd they should. It’ the healthiest thing that’ happened to us. I mean, I grew up in an era when the most powerful entity in the economics of journalism was advertising. And newspapers didn’ know much about what readers wanted. Their economics were driven by what advertisers wanted. And now the economics of a place like The New York Times are almost the total reverse. Readers pay our bills more than they ever have. We have to listen to them —nd I’ really, really rather be listening to a group of readers, even if they’e mad at me, than a group of advertisers who might be mad at me. They have much, much more power. And I think that’ like, as much as we complain about the changing economics of the business, which, you know, makes us all nervous, that’ a good thing. That’ a great thing, in fact.

This transcript has been lightly edited for clarity. A more condensed version appears i n print .

Follow the public editor on Twitter@spaydl and reach her by email at public@nytimes.com.

The New York Times headquarters building. | Andrew Burton/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170107ed17004v1
