World
Islamic State Claims Responsibility for Istanbul Nightclub Attack; New Year's assault killed at least 39 people

By Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut and Emre Peker in Istanbul 
1,144 words
2 January 2017
20:34
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State claimed responsibility Monday for a New Year's attack on an upscale Istanbul nightclub that killed at least 39 people, saying it targeted Turkey in retaliation for military operations against the extremist group in neighboring Syria.

Turkish security forces said they were hunting for the lone gunman who opened fire with an assault rifle on revelers in a popular party spot overlooking the Bosporus before ditching his weapon and slipping away early Sunday.

Authorities released two photographs of the suspect, a young looking male with short hair and no significant beard or mustache, clad in a puffy, black winter jacket.

After President Recep Tayyip Erdogan chaired a regular cabinet meeting Monday, Deputy Prime Minister Numan Kurtulmus said authorities have the suspect's fingerprints and basic appearance and are close to identifying him. He said eight other people were detained in connection with the attack, and were being questioned Monday by the counterterrorism police.

Islamic State's propaganda arm characterized the gunman as a "soldier of the caliphate" and attributed the group's actions to Turkish airstrikes and artillery attacks it says have killed Muslims.

"It is natural for ISIS to claim this," a Turkish official said of Sunday's attack. ISIS is an acronym for Islamic State. But the official pointed to a discrepancy in the group's statement, which said the attacker used grenades. Authorities said only a firearm was used. The official said it was too soon to say definitively the militant group mounted the attack.

Islamic State hasn't previously said it was responsible for attacks blamed on it by Turkish authorities.

Turkey's military, along with Syrian rebels, has been fighting Islamic State in Syria in a push that Turkish officials say has killed more than 1,000 militants since it began in August. The campaign was launched after a suicide bombing at a wedding that killed more than 50 people. Turkey blamed the attack on the jihadist group.

Turkish forces are now closing in on the extremists' stronghold of al-Bab in Aleppo province and Turkish jets and artillery pounded Islamic State targets on Monday, the military said.

"The claim of responsibility issued by ISIS is the latest sign that we've entered a phase of ‘pen war' between ISIS and Turkey," said Michael Horowitz, the director of intelligence at Prime Source, an analysis and risk consultancy group.

The government, in what has become an increasingly routine step, has imposed a media ban on coverage of the New Year's attack, prohibiting reporting of information other than what is released by authorities. The country imposed a state of emergency after the failed coup attempt in July.

Turkey, a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, has been an important ally of the U.S. in the battle against Islamic State in Syria, and has been the target of a series of bloody terrorist attacks, including one on Istanbul's airport that left 45 people dead.

The attacks, some of which were carried out by Kurdish insurgents, have killed more than 300 people over the past year.

The two biggest of the three opposition parties in parliament called on the government to account for security failures in the wake of the New Year's attack, charging the administration with failing to fulfill its responsibilities as some lawmakers called for the cabinet's resignation.

The public response to the Sunday attack was an overwhelming display of unity, with celebrities, politicians and popular media outlets all condemning the attack and calling for solidarity. Yet some people also took to social media to condemn the government and its conservative supporters. Turkish leaders have characterized the attack as an attempt to foment unrest in the nation's multicultural and ethnically diverse society.

Mr. Kurtulmus, the government spokesman, said the attack also aimed to demoralize a nation reeling from the violence of 2016 and was retaliation for Turkey's cross-border operations, led by its incursion against Islamic State and Kurdish militants inside Syria. Turkey will continue its military campaign until it extinguishes all threats, Mr. Kurtulmus said.

Islamic State has repeatedly called on Turkey to end military operations against it, warning of escalated attacks.

The territory held by Islamic State has shrunk steadily over the past year—rom a swath of Syria and Iraq that was the size of Belgium to patchy islands of control in the two countries—n the face of separate campaigns by a U.S.-led coalition and by Russia and Syria, in addition to the Turkish efforts.

Across the border in Iraq, Baghdad's military, with American backing, is forcing Islamic State out of some of the biggest cities they once controlled.

As the group is uprooted from its strongholds, analysts say it could fall back on its roots as a guerrilla insurgency, launching hit-and-run style terror attacks and bombings.

Islamic State suicide bombings in Baghdad have been on the rise since early last year. The latest was a car bombing Monday that Iraqi officials said had killed at least 24 people and wounded 37 others at a market in the Iraqi capital's Sadr City neighborhood.

Europe's police agency, Europol, said late last year that it expects Islamic State to increasingly target Western cities as the group continues to lose territory, as a way to remain relevant through attention-grabbing headlines.

An Islamic State attacker used a truck to plow into a crowded Christmas market in Berlin in December, killing 12 and wounding nearly 50. And in Paris in November 2015, a series of coordinated attacks targeted concertgoers at the Bataclan music venue, sidewalk cafes and a football stadium, killing 130 and wounding 368.

Previous attacks inside Turkey thought to have been the responsibility of Islamic State have killed and wounded scores of Muslims which may be why the group has been reluctant to claim them if they were behind them. On Monday, Islamic State portrayed the New Year's attack as an assault on Christians. It described the targeted Reina nightclub as "one of the most well-known nightclubs where Christians were celebrating their pagan holiday."

According to Turkish authorities, 26 of the 39 victims were Turkish dual nationals or foreigners, including people from Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon, India, Belgium, Morocco, Iraq, Tunisia, Kuwait, Russia, Syria, Canada and Israel.

Noam Raydan in Beirut and Ali A. Nabhan in Erbil, Iraq, contributed to this article.

Write to Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com and Emre Peker at emre.peker@wsj.com

Related

* Turkish Police Hunt for Gunman in Istanbul Nightclub Terror Attack

* Dozens Killed in New Year's Attack at Istanbul Nightclub

* Islamic State Claims Series of Deadly Baghdad Bombings

Document WSJO000020170102ed120008d
