World News: World Watch

835 words
27 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

IRAQ

Military Says ISIS

Near Defeat in Mosul

The battle to wrest full control of the Iraqi city of Mosul from Islamic State will be over in a few days, the Iraqi military said on Monday, as elite counterterrorism units fought militants among the narrow alleyways of the historic Old City.

An attempted fight-back by militants failed on Sunday night and Islamic State's grip on the city, once its de facto capital in Iraq, was weakened, a senior commander said.

"Only a small part [of the militants] remains in the city, specifically the Old City," said Lt. Gen. Abdul Ghani al-Assadi, commander of the counterterrorism Service in Mosul.

"From a military perspective, Daesh [Islamic State] is finished," Gen. Assadi said. "It has lost its fighting spirit and its balance. We are making calls to them to surrender or die."

As CTS units battled militants in the densely populated maze of tiny streets of the Old City, which lies by the western bank of the Tigris River, Gen. Assadi said the area under Islamic State control in Mosul was now less than 2 square kilometers.

Mosul will fall "in very few days, God willing," he added.

Up to 350 militants are estimated by the military to be besieged in the Old City, dug in among civilians in crumbling houses and making extensive use of booby traps, suicide bombers and sniper fire to slow the advance of Iraqi troops.

More than 50,000 civilians, about half of the Old City's population, remain trapped behind Islamic State lines with little food, water or medicines, according to those who escaped.

-- Reuters

---

SOUTHEAST ASIA

Drug Haul Burned

In Myanmar, Thailand

Officials in Myanmar and Thailand burned narcotics worth more than $800 million on Monday to mark the U.N. day against drug abuse and trafficking.

The move came as authorities struggle to stem the flood of illicit drugs in the region, with Thailand's justice minister last year saying the country's war on drugs was failing.

In Thailand's Ayutthaya province, more than 9 tons of drugs with a street value of more than 20 billion baht ($590 million) went up in smoke including methamphetamines, known locally as "yaba" or "crazy drug," according to police.

"Currently, we are able to take down a lot of networks, including . . . transnational networks bringing drugs into Thailand . . . to be shipped to Malaysia and other countries," Sirinya Sitthichai, secretary-general of the Office of Narcotics Control Board, told reporters in Ayutthaya.

In neighboring Myanmar, the police said they destroyed confiscated drugs worth around $217 million. Myanmar remains one of the world's largest producers of illicit drugs, including opium, heroin and methamphetamines. Those narcotics are often smuggled into China.

Last year, Myanmar lawmakers voiced disappointment over efforts to tackle the drug problem. The market for methamphetamines has been growing in Southeast Asia, the United Nations has said. It estimates that Southeast Asia's trade in heroin and methamphetamine was worth $31 billion in 2013.

-- Reuters

---

COLOMBIA

Tour Boat Sinks;

6 Drown, 15 Missing

Scuba divers on Monday searched for bodies in a reservoir near the Colombian city of Medellin where a tourist boat packed with more than 150 passengers for the holiday weekend capsized, leaving at least six people dead and 15 missing.

Rescuers including firefighters and air force pilots in helicopters searched for survivors at the Guatape reservoir where El Almirante ferry sank.

A flotilla of recreational boats and jet skis had rushed to the scene, pulling people from the boat as it went down and avoiding an even deadlier accident.

Videos circulating on social media show the turquoise-and-yellow-trimmed party boat rocking back and forth as people crawled down from a fourth-deck roof as it sank in a matter of minutes.

Survivors described hearing a loud explosion near the men's bathroom that knocked out power a few minutes after the boat began its cruise around the giant lake. As water flooded on board, pressure built and people were sucked under by the sinking ship.

"Those on the first and second decks sank immediately," survivor Lorena Salazar told local media. "All we could do was scream and call for help. . . . It was completely chaotic."

-- Associated Press

---

MONGOLIA

Ruling Party Loses

Vote for Presidency

The Mongolian ruling party's candidate lost in presidential elections to a populist business tycoon and a nationalist wanting the country to benefit more from its mineral wealth, preliminary results early Tuesday showed. The election was headed for a runoff.

The Mongolian People's Party's Miyegombo Enkhbold, speaker of the parliament and a horse dealer, garnered 30% of about 1.3 million votes cast Monday, according to the General Election Commission.

Business tycoon Khaltmaa Battulga of the Democratic Party won 39%, while nationalist Sainkhuu Ganbaatar of the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party, a vocal critic of mining giant Rio Tinto's operations in the country, garnered 32%.

-- Associated Press

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170627ed6r0001l
