Opinion
What Comes After the Syria Strikes; With American credibility restored, Trump should lead a diplomatic effort to replace Assad.

By Paul Wolfowitz 
940 words
11 April 2017
19:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Strong American action can dramatically change the attitudes of other countries. It makes enemies more cautious, friends more supportive, and fence-sitters more cooperative. It provides leverage in negotiations and improves opportunities for coalition building. Last week President Trump demonstrated American resolve by retaliating against the Syrian government after Bashar Assad used chemical weapons. Now Mr. Trump must follow through with a broad diplomatic effort to end the country's bloodshed.

Among the most interesting reactions to the American strike were two from Iraqi Shiite leaders. Last Thursday Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a moderate, and the cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, a firebrand, both called for Mr. Assad to step down. Mr. Sadr predictably denounced the American strike. Mr. Abadi indirectly praised it by noting how Iraqis had suffered from Saddam Hussein's chemical weapons.

These calls for Mr. Assad to step down might seem at odds with the conventional wisdom, which puts the Sunni-Shiite conflict at the heart of everything in the Middle East. Shouldn't Iraq's Shiites naturally side with Iran's Syrian proxy and approve of Mr. Assad's brutal treatment of Sunni opponents? Yet there are issues more important than the commonly noted sectarian divisions. The people of Iraq know well that the Assad regime has supported the insurgents and suicide bombers who have killed thousands of Iraqis, and hundreds of Americans, since 2003. The Bush administration largely turned a blind eye to that support, and President Obama did so even more.

In August 2009 then-Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki demanded that Syria hand over two Iraqis in Damascus who were believed to be connected to car bombings in Baghdad. The Obama administration, rather than support the Iraqi government—r even demand an investigation—aid nothing for a week. The State Department then announced that the U.S. was officially neutral. Last week's decisive action was a different sort of American signal.

America can now lead the effort to bring some semblance of stability to Syria. Washington should recognize that peace is impossible with Mr. Assad still in power, but also that millions of Syrians—articularly the Christian and Alawite minorities—ay feel endangered by the strongman's departure. The aim should be to replace Mr. Assad's regime with new governance arrangements that can provide assurance to these minorities while also ending the current government's oppression of the country's Sunni majority.

Fashioning such an outcome would require diplomacy of extraordinary creativity. But the U.S. starts with a distinct advantage. Unlike Iran and Russia, America has no interest in exercising control over or acquiring a military position in Syria. To the contrary, as long as the bleeding stops, the U.S. would be happiest to leave Syria to the Syrians. So how can Washington strengthen its diplomatic effort in Syria and at the same time weaken Iranian influence in Iraq?

First, the U.S. should use public diplomacy to highlight the responsibility of the Assad regime for the suffering of thousands of innocent Iraqis over the past 14 years. This effort should also explain, to the extent that evidence is available, Mr. Assad's efforts to strengthen Islamic State. The dictator has tried to make his regime seem like the only alternative to domination by terrorists. He has done this by attacking Syrian moderates and freeing imprisoned extremists who went on to become ISIS leaders.

The U.S. should encourage Saudi Arabia to play a constructive role in Iraq by using its considerable economic weight to counterbalance Iranian influence. The Saudis have in the past shown a willingness to treat Iraq as an Arab partner and not a Shiite adversary. That realism, which was evident under an earlier Saudi leadership, seems to be re-emerging. Two months ago Saudi Foreign Minister Adel al-Jubeir visited Baghdad, the first such trip in 27 years.

The Trump administration should also counter the mistaken belief that Saudi Arabia prevented the U.S. from supporting the Shiite uprising against Saddam Hussein after the liberation of Kuwait in 1991. Many Iraqis, and even some reputable historians, still believe this. Yet the truth is exactly the opposite. The U.S. should make public the record of Saudi efforts to persuade the first President Bush and President Clinton to support anti-Saddam Shiite rebels. It will be difficult for Saudi-Iraqi relations to develop without countering the belief that Saudi Arabia is partly responsible for mass graves of Iraqi Shiites.

American diplomats should seek to engage the regional Arab players in addressing the difficult challenge of postconflict reconciliation. This will confront Syria in the aftermath of any peace settlement, and it will become important in Iraq once Mosul is liberated. Reconciliation processes that are suited to local cultures and deal with the horrific legacy of totalitarian Arab regimes cannot be overseen by outsiders. But the diplomatic effort should emphasize their importance regardless.

These political and diplomatic actions could complement and reinforce more-concrete measures to change facts on the ground in Syria, such as creating safe zones or imposing some kind of no-fly zone. These efforts will not be simple, nor will they yield immediate results. But this framework would go a long way in addressing the common danger of radical extremism and in stemming the flow of refugees that has become a humanitarian disaster and a threat to U.S. interests.

Mr. Wolfowitz, a scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, has served as deputy defense secretary and ambassador to Indonesia.

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a00a1e
