Live Briefing
World; Europe
Live Updates: Trump Is in Brussels, and NATO Officials Are Anxious

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
1,402 words
25 May 2017
10:44
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

•resident Trump is in Brussels on Thursday, on the fourth leg of a grueling first overseas trip as head of state. He will meet with NATO leaders, and analysts say anxiety is high but expectations are low.

 It is his first visit to the Belgian capital —eadquarters of the European Union and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization —ince calling it a “ellhole” after coordinated suicide bombings there last year.

•r. Trump’ arrival was greeted by scattered protests and a sign saying, “esist” near the United States Embassy.

•n the wake of Mr. Trump’ criticism that the alliance should do more against terrorism, NATO announced that it would formally join the fight against the Islamic State.

•igh on his agenda is a summit meeting with European Union leaders including Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, and Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission.

•uropean leaders’ain hope is that Mr. Trump will explicitly endorse Article 5 of the Atlantic alliance’ founding treaty, which states the principle that an attack on any member is an attack on all.

NATO leaders are holding their breath: Will Mr. Trump endorse Article 5?

If there’ any real drama in Mr. Trump’ visit, besides wondering if he will go off script, it will be his comments when he unveils a 9/11 memorial — piece of twisted metal from the World Trade Center, which was destroyed in the Sept. 11 attacks —utside NATO’ new building.

(Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany will unveil a chunk of the Berlin Wall, which came down in 1989, to symbolize how the alliance kept the peace during the Cold War. Potentially awkward: Mrs. Merkel will meet former President Barack Obama before meeting Mr. Trump.)

While Mr. Trump has decided that the alliance isn’ really obsolete, as he once said, he has never publicly committed to Article 5. His vice president and defense secretary have done so, but Mr. Trump has been alarmingly silent on the issue.

But he is expected to finally do so on Thursday, White House officials said, since the only time NATO has ever invoked Article 5 was to defend the United States after the 9/11 attacks. More than 1,000 non-American soldiers from NATO countries have died in Afghanistan in the name of Article 5.

But one never knows exactly what Mr. Trump will say, and NATO officials will not breathe easy until Mr. Trump actually utters the words. Of course, NATO leaders would also like him to say something critical about Russia and its annexation of Ukraine, but Mr. Trump has been pretty quiet on that topic, too.

—teven Erlanger

NATO says it will formally join the coalition fight against ISIS.

In the wake of Mr. Trump’ criticism that the Atlantic alliance should do more against terrorism, its secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, has announced that the alliance would join the global coalition that is fighting Islamic State militants, another gesture toward Mr. Trump.

“his will send a strong political message of NATO’ commitment to the fight against terrorism,”r. Stoltenberg said. But a message is what it mostly was. The United States, after all, formed the coalition, which it leads and runs out of its military headquarters, without major NATO input, though numerous member nations are also part of the coalition fighting the Islamic State.

NATO has had a small mission in Iraq to train soldiers there and will enhance it, but will much change now it has agreed to formally join the coalition? Probably not.

—teven Erlanger

What else do European Union leaders want from Mr. Trump?

Simply put: More Mike Pence.

Federica Mogherini, the European Union’ foreign policy chief, said at a news conference on Wednesday that she would welcome the same “essage of continuity”bout trans-Atlantic cooperation that Vice President Pence brought by visiting Brussels in February, soon after Mr. Trump took office.

Mr. Pence’ visit was “ clear sign”f “illingness to work together,”s. Mogherini said.

Her comments represent a widely held hope in Brussels that Mr. Trump will avoid bashing the European project in favor of constructive dialogue on global challenges.

Ms. Mogherini, accompanied by Antonio Tajani, the president of the European Parliament, will attend a meeting on Thursday morning along with Mr. Trump, Mr. Tusk and Mr. Juncker.

Ms. Mogherini said she wanted Mr. Trump to discuss carrying out the Paris agreement on climate change, which in the past he has previously threatened to abandon, and investing in multilateral organizations like the United Nations, where the Trump administration wants further funding cuts.

Even if the Trump administration was set on revising American policies, Ms. Mogherini said, it was important to have “n open and constructive dialogue.”

—ames Kanter

The president’ response on Manchester: ‘e will win this fight’gainst terrorism.

Ahead of the NATO meeting, Mr. Trump met the Belgian prime minister, Charles Michel, on Wednesday and spoke at a news conference in which he denounced those who were behind the bombing attack in Manchester, England, that left 22 people dead, including children, and about 60 others injured.

President Trump in Belgium: “e will win this fight”gainst terrorism https://t.co/STiziNKrGOhttps://t.co/sgvnHyLbGn —CNN (@CNN) May 24, 2017

Belgians take to the streets in protest against Mr. Trump.

Amid the pomp and ceremony and red carpet unfurled for his arrival, ordinary Belgians gave Mr. Trump a chilly reception, however.

Thousands marched on Wednesday to protest his presence, carrying signs that read, “olidarity with the women of the whole world”nd “rump go away.”

Activists climbed a crane to hoist a sign saying, “ESIST”ear the American Embassy.

And the famous concert hall Ancienne Belgique put up a sign that said, “Don’ duck for Donald.”

—laire Barthelemy

Tusk: ‘e should watch over our legacy of freedom together.’

Mr. Trump’ formal introduction to the complexities of the European Union began with a cordial handshake a walk through a forest of flags.

Met by Mr. Tusk, the president of the European Council, the American president was guided along a red carpet through the newly completed headquarters of the bloc, where each of the 28 member states flies its national flag. (Britain, of course, is negotiating its divorce from the bloc.)

The building, called the Europa, is meant to represent a fresh start for the Union, the organization that Mr. Trump has called into question with his support for Britain’ decision to leave and for populist Eurosceptics like Marine Le Pen, the French leader of the far-right National Front.

Mr. Tusk, a former Polish prime minister and a staunch defender of democracy and openness, was expected to meet with Mr. Trump and Mr. Juncker for about an hour. Mr. Tusk, who warned this year that Mr. Trump was threatening Europe’ stability, made his priorities for the meeting clear at a prize-giving ceremony the previous evening.

It was, Mr. Tusk told his audience, “mportant to keep our relations with the United States as close as possible and as long as possible —t least for as long as this value remains a priority also on the other side of the Atlantic.”

Mr. Tusk said he would try to convince Mr. Trump “hat euroatlantism is primarily cooperation of the free for the sake of freedom; that if we want to prevent the scenario that has already been named by our opponents not so long ago in Munich as the ‘ost-West world order,’e should watch over our legacy of freedom together.”

—ames Kanter

For more breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @nytimesworld on Twitter.

* Trump Is Expected to Endorse NATO’ Mutual Aid Pledge, Ending Silence

* European Leaders Hope to Win Trump’ Favor

* Trump Leaves Israel With Hope for Peace, but No Plan for It

Prime Minister Charles Michel of Belgium welcomed President Trump at a ceremony at the Melsbroek military airport near Brussels on Wednesday. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | Jens Stoltenberg, secretary general of NATO, at a news conference in Brussels on Wednesday. | Virginia Mayo/Associated Press | Vice President Mike Pence on Monday reassured the European Union of President Trump's support during a joint news conference in Brussels. | By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Document NYTFEED020170525ed5p001up
