World News: U.S. Warns Syria Over Chemical Weapons --- American military prepares for possible strike if Assad regime launches attack

By Dion Nissenbaum and Thomas Grove 
623 words
28 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military stepped up preparations for a possible strike against the Syrian regime after Washington said it picked up signs that President Bashar al-Assad was preparing to use chemical weapons again.

The White House set the stage for a new showdown with Mr. Assad and his allies with an unusual warning late Monday that the Syrian regime would pay a "heavy price" if it launches another chemical-weapons attack on its own people.

The statement came after the U.S. learned Syria had armed a warplane with chemical weapons that could be used at any time, U.S. officials said Tuesday.

U.S. officials said they hoped the blunt public threat would deter Mr. Assad from using such weapons, but began devising military options if President Donald Trump decides to strike Syria again.

In April, Mr. Trump ordered a cruise-missile strike on a Syrian airfield after a chemical attack widely blamed on the Assad regime killed more than 80 people in Syria's Idlib province.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson raised the issue in a call with Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov on Monday as the U.S. pressed Moscow to constrain its Syrian ally, according to a U.S. official.

On Tuesday, Nikki Haley, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told a congressional hearing that the White House statement was meant to be a warning to Russia and Iran, Mr. Assad's two major allies in the six-year Syrian war.

Russia and Iran responded to the White House warning with their own criticisms of American involvement in the Middle East.

Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman, said Moscow considers "such threats to a lawful government unacceptable," according to Russian news agencies.

On Twitter, Iran's Foreign Minister Javad Zarif suggested that the U.S. threats would detract from the fight against Islamic State, also known as ISIS. "Another dangerous U.S. escalation in Syria on fake pretext will only serve ISIS, precisely when it's being wiped out by Iraqi & Syrian people," he tweeted.

In Syria, Mr. Assad visited a Russian air base on Tuesday, where he was filmed climbing into the cockpit of a Russian warplane. A Syrian government official denied that the regime has chemical weapons.

The U.S. warnings come amid a recent rise in battlefield confrontations between the Syrian regime and American forces battling Islamic State in Syria, and the confrontations threaten to widen into a more serious clash with the regime.

The new standoff was triggered by surveillance of the Shayrat airfield that the U.S. said was used in April to launch the earlier chemical-weapons attack. The strike Mr. Trump ordered in April targeted that airfield.

Images of dead and dying children as a result of that April attack spurred outrage at the time, and Mr. Trump cited the images in saying the attack had changed his view of the conflict and Mr. Assad.

For the first time since the April strike, U.S. officials said Tuesday they had new intelligence showing the Syrian regime had moved a warplane into a shelter associated with chemical weapons at the Shayrat airfield.

Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, said the U.S. has seen "actions suggestive of intent to use chemical weapons."

The U.S. has been tracking developments at Shayrat for several days and indications that Syria is preparing to use chemical weapons have become "more compelling" in the last 24 hours, he said Tuesday morning.

---

Maria Abi-Habib and Asa Fitch contributed to this article.