World
U.S. Seeks to Stay Neutral in Iraq Conflict; Trump's declaration comes as Baghdad government forces push into Kirkuk amid conflict with Kurds over disputed territory, threatening to disrupt fight against Islamic State

By Ben Kesling, Nancy A. Youssef and Paul Sonne 
1,312 words
17 October 2017
01:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he U.S. sought to stay on the sidelines as an all-out battle broke out between two of its closest ground partners in the campaign against Islamic State and raised concerns about a broader civil conflict erupting in Iraq.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi ordered federal troops to push into Kirkuk province early Monday and occupy strategic locations that Kurdish Peshmerga forces had taken in a disputed area during the three-year battle against the Sunni militant group.

The clashes follow a referendum in which the Kurds, who run their own semiautonomous region in northern Iraq, voted overwhelmingly in favor of independence, defying Baghdad, regional powers and the U.S., which warned it would distract from the final battles to defeat Islamic State.

Elite government forces swept through disputed areas and into the regional capital to raise the Iraqi flag over the government center and reassert national control. Kurdish Peshmerga forces appeared unprepared for a coordinated assault, and yielded the heart of Kirkuk faster than many military experts expected.

The situation laid bare the risks of Washington's decision to defeat Islamic State by backing a pair of local forces without addressing their long-simmering resentments against one another. For years, the U.S. has avoided drawing up a definitive plan for dealing with Iraq after the retreat of Islamic State, preferring instead to wait until the group's final defeat and leave the matter up to Iraqi politicians.

President Donald Trump said U.S. forces wouldn't take decisive action to support the Baghdad government or the Iraqi Kurds. "We don't like the fact that they're clashing," Mr. Trump told reporters at the White House on Monday. Nevertheless, he said, "We're not taking sides."

The U.S. neutrality as Iraqi forces reclaimed disputed territory offered a de facto endorsement of Iraq's central government and dealt a blow to Kurdish independence aspirations.

"Inaction is a form of action," said Lukman Faily, a former Iraqi ambassador to the U.S. and a Kurd who favors a united Iraq over a separate Kurdish state.

Kurdish leaders forced the matter with an independence referendum in September that Washington and Baghdad failed to quash. That vote set off a chain of events that led Mr. Abadi to take Monday's actions.

A State Department official called on all sides to stand down and refrain from any further provocative actions. The official warned the biggest winners from tensions would be Islamic State and Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps.

"This situation requires a peaceful, political solution," the official said. "The U.S., the government of Iraq, the Kurdistan Regional Government and our entire coalition must be united in prioritizing the final defeat of ISIS."

But Kurdish officials said the move by Baghdad involved Iranian-backed militias and showed Mr. Abadi's willingness to give way to Iranian influence growing in Iraq.

Others, however, said the move was a measure Mr. Abadi needed to take to reassert the integrity of the Iraqi state.

The violence could mark a turning point in Washington's long and close alliance with the Iraqi Kurds, who have served as a critical partner for U.S. forces in the country since the 2003 invasion and now see Washington's backing of Mr. Abadi as a rebuke.

"The Kurds are amazing, and have been through a lot, but we need to get over our sentimentality," said Michael O'Hanlon, a senior fellow in foreign policy at the Brookings Institution. "Their ambitions inside Iraq are not compatible with a stable internal situation for that country."

The Obama administration returned U.S. forces to Iraq in 2014, some 2½ears after their high-profile withdrawal, rushing to the country's aid as Islamic State swept the nation and threatened Baghdad.

At the time, former President Barack Obama, wary of stumbling back into a costly occupation, promised American troops would destroy Islamic State but said they wouldn't "get dragged into another ground war in Iraq."

Instead, the U.S. strategy was to make local forces the tip of the spear and "advise and assist" them, rather than take charge. American troops embedded with Iraq's national security forces and the Kurdish Peshmerga, among other local fighting groups, and provided arms, advice and air support, as the locals pushed back against Islamic State.

As the fight progressed, the uncomfortable question of what would come next dogged U.S. officials. Washington had backed groups that long had been at odds, realizing they could turn on one another after defeating their common enemy.

The Trump administration opted to continue the "advise and assist" strategy, while adjusting tactics to give U.S. troops in the conflict zone more leeway to engage the enemy.

One of the first signs the U.S.'s partners were beginning to turn on one another came when the Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani said in June that Iraqi Kurdistan would hold an independence referendum on Sept. 25.

U.S. diplomats went into overdrive trying to derail the vote, recognizing Kurdish issues with Baghdad but stating that a slapdash referendum amounted to an illegitimate and unilateral attempt to dismantle the Iraqi state.

Mr. Barzani proceeded with the referendum anyway, defying both Baghdad and Washington, as Kurdish officials said they had dealt with Baghdad's dysfunction long enough, suffered in the fight against Islamic State and deserved their own nation.

Baghdad responded on Monday with military action.

The U.S. military sought to play down the extent of the hostilities, saying some reports about the violence in Kirkuk had been overstated.

"We have not seen levels of violence suggested in some media reports," Army Col. Rob Manning told reporters.

Military officials said the territorial moves were the result of coordination between the Kurds and the Iraqi government, noting that Mr. Abadi had long telegraphed his intent to bring Kirkuk back under Baghdad's control.

Conflict with Islamic State shook up borders in Iraq starting in 2014 and led the Kurds to expand their territory by some 40%. In June 2014, Kurdish forces claimed Kirkuk after Iraq's national forces abandoned their positions there during the Islamic State onslaught. Iraqi Kurds consider the city their historic capital and say talks should take place to determine the territory's fate.

It remains unclear whether the Iraqi government will stop its push to reassert control over national territory at Kirkuk. Other contested cities in Iraq changed hands during the three-year battle against Islamic State, including Sinjar. U.S. military officials said they didn't believe Baghdad's action would go any farther "for now."

The Pentagon said U.S. "commanders on the ground are engaged" in encouraging dialogue and stressed that the U.S. priority continued to be the full defeat of Islamic State.

The unrest comes as Iran extends influence in Iraq, in part by backing Shiite militias that have also been fighting Islamic State but without U.S. support.

Jennifer Cafarella, an analyst for the Washington-based Institute for the Study of War, said the U.S. should rethink its strategy in Iraq if it wants to keep Baghdad aligned with Washington instead of Tehran.

"The United States needs to reorient its polices away from the single focus of defeating ISIS," Ms. Cafarella said. "Otherwise it will fail to gain a leadership role over the situation."

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com, Nancy A. Youssef at Nancy.Youssef@wsj.com and Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com

Related

* As Islamic State Recedes, Iraqi Forces and Kurds Turn on Each Other

Document WSJO000020171016edag006em
