THE THREAD
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The 5.14.17 Issue

786 words
28 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RE: OPEN MARRIAGE

Susan Dominus wrote about the experiences of nonmonogamous couples.

I cannot express the depth of feelings this article brought up on many levels. I was touched within the first three sentences. This is a topic that does not routinely enjoy open dialogue as people tend to prefer obscurity around these issues. But ongoing murkiness only perpetuates unhappiness and dissatisfaction, not to mention resentment. I personally have been involved in an extramarital relationship for three years.

Yet through Dominus's thorough treatment and the candid experiences of those profiled, along with her completely nonjudgmental posture, I came to terms with my own need to be clear about how I want to participate in all relationships going forward, whether romantic or professional, unconventional or ''normal.'' As a writer, I found that the article also gave me the gift of bravery to write honestly, as it will touch someone, somewhere. Thank you for an amazingly researched and written story. Leslie, Irvine, Calif.

Dominus's article was informative, but it had one big flaw: the choice to feature Daniel and Elizabeth. Daniel and Elizabeth, we learn, have an open marriage. Elizabeth, the author informs us, is having an affair with a married man. That man's wife does not know about Elizabeth or the relationship. In choosing Daniel and Elizabeth, Dominus fuels the very stereotype that she attempts to poke a hole in: that polyamorous couples cause the ''degradation of marriage.''

There are plenty of polyamorous couples on equal footing, couples who have mutual long-term relationships with either open married people or single people. The whole point of an open marriage is transparency, full disclosure and the avoidance of uncomfortable secrets. Madeline Schwartzman, Brooklyn

RE: HOMEOWNERSHIP

Matthew Desmond wrote about the role of the mortgage-interest deduction, or MID -- and how it benefits the wealthy and upper middle class -- in American homeownership.

I am in complete agreement with Desmond about the regressive nature of the mortgage-interest deduction. In the recent book I co-edited, ''Ending Homelessness: Why We Haven't, How We Can,'' several authors and I echo the truly outrageous nature of the MID.

However, Desmond doesn't go far enough in pointing out inequities in the system. Over the last 40 years, inflation-adjusted incomes of the top 1 percent of wage earners in this country have risen by 241 percent, while incomes of the bottom 90 percent have stagnated, barely keeping up with the cost of living. The top 20 percent of households control more than 80 percent of all the wealth in the country. This is true inequality. If Desmond is really interested in braving the proverbial third rail of American economic policy, why not means-test the MID, Medicare and Social Security and fundamentally change the tax system in this country. Perhaps we should even consider a universal basic income for everyone, means-tested, of course. Donald W. Burnes, Ph.D., founder and board chairman, The Burnes Center on Poverty and Homelessness, University of Denver

I have been a lawyer specializing in mortgage law since 1978. The article is correct in saying that the MID is unfair and inflates home prices. I personally own my home outright with no mortgage, so I do not benefit directly from the MID, though I do benefit from the author's little discussed property-tax deduction, which, though smaller than the MID for most people, is significant and also distorts housing prices. Real estate taxes in the Northeast are exorbitant, often tens of thousands of dollars a year, all deductible. The MID and the real estate tax deduction work together to benefit homeowners, but the author barely mentions this fact.

I would be happy to lose my real estate tax deduction if it meant that more people were able to own homes, but the increase in federal tax revenue resulting from the elimination of both deductions would more likely pay off things like the ''mother of all bombs'' dropped on ISIS or the hideously expensive missiles rained down on an airfield in Syria.

Why not level the playing field and allow renters to deduct their rent? That way we would ensure that the benefit flowed directly to renters. This could be paid for by a sliding-scale cap on both the MID and the real estate tax deduction. Instead of arbitrary caps, the percentage of deductibility would decrease as the homeowner's income increases. Nancy Hopkins, Lucketts, Va.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Send your thoughts to magazine@nytimes.com.

(PHOTOGRAPHS BY HOLLY ANDRES) DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY GIACOMO GAMBINERI) 

Document NYTF000020170528ed5s0007r
