U.S.; Politics
After Chemical Attack, Asking if U.S. Remarks Emboldened Assad

By HELENE COOPER 
948 words
8 April 2017
02:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n March 30, Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson and United Nations Ambassador Nikki R. Haley, in separate appearances, reversed American foreign policy and said the Trump administration was not focused on getting rid of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

The next day, the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, backed them up, and spoke of a “olitical reality that we have to accept in terms of where we are right now.”

Four days later, on April 4, Mr. Assad launched the deadliest chemical attacks since 2013, dropping the nerve agent sarin in a dawn strike that drew condemnation from around the world and prompted the first American military strikes against the Syrian regime, and the first national security crisis of President Trump’ term.

At the Pentagon and in national security circles, the lightning series of events has raised a sharp question: Did the Haley-Tillerson-Spicer remarks embolden Mr. Assad to believe that he could get away with the chemical weapons attack?

“he close proximity of Haley and Tillerson’ comments may have given Assad the assurance that he could do this,”aid Linda Robinson, a senior international policy analyst at RAND Corporation who traveled to the region in February with Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the commander of the United States Central Command.

In an interview earlier this week with AM Tampa Bay, Senator Marco Rubio, Republican of Florida, accused Mr. Tillerson of “n essence, almost nodding to the idea that Assad was going to get to stay in some capacity.”e added, “ don’ think it’ a coincidence that a few days later we see this.”

People at the Pentagon —here Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, along with the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, and General Votel, quickly came up with a retaliatory military plan —ave also questioned why Mr. Assad would risk his gains in the six-year civil war with a chemical attack. The generals appear to have brought Mr. Trump, Mr. Tillerson and Ms. Haley back to the former American frame of mind that “ssad must go.”

“hatever clumsiness the secretary of state and U.N. ambassador committed in the last week, nobody but Bashar al-Assad is responsible for the chemical weapons attack, and we should not blur the morality of who is to blame,”aid Kori Schake, a Hoover Institution fellow who edited the book “arriors and Citizens: American Views of Our Military”ith Mr. Mattis.

But, Ms. Schake added, “he president’ indiscipline will result in a lot of the kinds of reversals we just saw on Syria, and the thoughtful people in the cabinet will have to figure out a way to meet the country’ strategic objectives.”

The need for the Pentagon to educate civilians in the Trump administration also featured in the decision by Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, to take Mr. Trump’ son-in-law and senior adviser, Jared Kushner, to Baghdad this week to meet with Iraqi authorities and American military officials in Iraq.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Assad’ decision to drop chemical weapons on Idlib most likely included anxiety over the Syrian government’ losses of military gains made in the past two years. But several officials said the remarks by Ms. Haley, Mr. Tillerson and Mr. Spicer could have emboldened Mr. Assad into believing that there would be no retaliation.

At the very least, the Trump administration has been sending mixed messages to Mr. Assad —nd to President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia —n its intentions in Syria. Just days after winning the presidential election in November, Mr. Trump signaled in an interview with The Wall Street Journal that in Syria, he would focus solely on bombing the Islamic State. “y attitude was, you’e fighting Syria, Syria is fighting ISIS, and you have to get rid of ISIS,”r. Trump said.

Just days after that, Mr. Assad seemed to take those comments to heart, and publicly called Mr. Trump a potential “atural ally”n the fight against terrorism.

“he Syrians can argue that they felt they were given a green light, with the U.S. sending very inconsistent messages,”aid Kathleen Hicks, director of the international security program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies.

Mr. Mattis and other military officials in the Trump administration were quick to urge their national security counterparts to respond forcefully to the chemical weapons attack. Over two days, the Pentagon drew up a list of options for responding that was whittled down to one —aunching cruise missiles at the Syrian air base of Al Shayrat. Intelligence officials had determined, with a high degree of confidence, that Syrian fighter jets took off from there in launching the chemical attack on Idlib.

Once he was presented with the cruise missile response, administration officials said Mr. Trump —ho said he was appalled by the television images of Syrian children killed or injured in the attack —nstantly approved the plan presented by Mr. Mattis and General McMaster.

And by Thursday, Mr. Tillerson had returned to the standard American foreign policy playbook on Mr. Assad. At the United Nations, Ms. Haley was also back on board.

“he moral stain of the Assad regime could no longer go unanswered,”he declared to the Security Council on Friday.

Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting.

Recent comments by American officials may have emboldened President Bashar al-Assad of Syria into believing that there would be no retaliation for this week’ chemical weapons attack. | Joseph Eid/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170408ed48000b5
