World News: U.S. Suggests Path to End Russia Sanctions --- Vice president says move depends on Moscow's cooperation in fight against  ISIS 

By Rebecca Ballhaus   
677 words
6 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

WASHINGTON -- U.S. Vice President Mike Pence on Sunday suggested the U.S. could lift sanctions on Russia in the coming months if President Vladimir Putin cooperates with the administration's fight against Islamic State, a remark that came as President Donald Trump faced criticism for appearing to draw an equivalence between Mr. Putin and the behavior of the U.S.

Mr. Pence was responding to ABC's George Stephanopoulos, who asked whether sanctions on Russia would remain in place as long as Moscow continued to violate the cease fire in Ukraine.

"I think that's a question that will be answered in the months ahead. It just simply all depends," Mr. Pence said. He added that the decision would depend on whether "we see the kind of changes in posture by Russia and the opportunity perhaps to work on common interests," including the fighting against Islamic State and other terrorists.

"The president is looking for an opportunity to begin that relationship anew. But, make no mistake about it, those decisions will await action, and they'll be very dependent on how the Russians respond in the days ahead," Mr. Pence said.

In an interview with Fox News host Bill O'Reilly, excerpts of which were released on Saturday, Mr. Trump responded to a remark about Mr. Putin being a "killer" by suggesting the U.S.'s record wasn't flawless, either.

The statement came after Mr. Trump again said he respected the Russian president and that Russia could help in the fight against Islamic State and other terrorists. The full interview was scheduled to air before the Super Bowl on Sunday.

"I say it's better to get along with Russia than not," Mr. Trump said, though he added that he didn't know whether he and Mr. Putin would hit it off.

"But he's a killer," Mr. O'Reilly interjected.

"We've got a lot of killers," Mr. Trump responded after a short pause. "What, you think our country's so innocent?"

Mr. Trump's remarks drew criticism Sunday, including from members of the president's own party, as critics charged the president with being too soft on a nation that is challenging and complicating U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East and Eastern Europe.

U.S. intelligence agencies say Russia, at Mr. Putin's direction, mounted a campaign to influence the American election in Mr. Trump's favor through cyber-hacking as part of a broader ambition to undermine Western liberalism. Russia has denied the hacking claim.

Mr. Trump has consistently defended the Russian leader and expressed skepticism about the intelligence community's claims before ultimately agreeing with the agencies' findings.

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said Sunday on CNN that he didn't want to "critique the president's every utterance," but offered a very different take on Russia and Mr. Putin: "He's a thug. He was not elected in a way that most people would consider a credible election. . . . I don't think there's any equivalency between the way the Russians conduct themselves and the way the United States does."

Mr. Pence defended the president's comments, telling NBC's Chuck Todd that Mr. Trump was "not in the least" drawing an equivalence between the U.S. and Mr. Putin. "I don't accept that it's a moral equivalency," Mr. Pence said.

The White House also said late Saturday that Mr. Trump had "a very good call" with Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko, addressing various topics including "Ukraine's long-running conflict with Russia." Russia has denied involvement in a nearly three-year conflict with Ukrainian government forces in Ukraine's east, despite evidence that it provides not only weapons and fighters to pro-Russian separatists there but also its own military units.

---

Devlin Barrett and James Marson contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170205ed260001c
