World News: Rebels Advance on  ISIS  in Syria --- Turkish-backed fighters take al-Bab as peace talks with regime open in Geneva

By Raja Abdulrahim   
581 words
24 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

Turkish-backed rebels said they had seized one of Islamic State's last urban strongholds in northern Syria on Thursday, as the opposition began a new round of peace talks with the regime in Geneva.

Turkey said forces had entered the center of al-Bab. The capture of the city further shrinks the extremist group's territory, which still includes its de facto capital in Syria, Raqqa, as well as large parts of the surrounding province and the neighboring province of Deir Ezzour. In the Iraqi city of Mosul, U.S.-backed government forces dealt Islamic State another loss on Thursday by taking part of the airport.

"We rid the whole city from ISIS this morning and now we are headed toward Tadif," said Mutasim Abbas, a commander with the rebel Mutasim Brigade, part of a coalition of opposition groups in the battle for al-Bab. Tadif, on the southern outskirts of al-Bab, sits on the highway leading to Raqqa and could mean the Turkish-backed forces intend to eventually launch an offensive on the city.

Turkey has played a central role in the fight for al-Bab, and has launched airstrikes on targets in the city. "Today we can say that almost all of al-Bab has been taken under control, and that [forces have] entered the center of town," Turkish defense minister, Fikri Isik, told Turkish television. "We will say that al-Bab is completely cleared of Daesh elements when search and screening activities are finished," he said, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

The peace talks, backed by the United Nations, opened as escalating regime airstrikes and clashes between the two sides showed the fragility of a two-month cease-fire. Talks in Kazakhstan in January and February were meant to secure the cease-fire, but failed to put in place a monitoring mechanism.

U.N. Syria envoy Staffan de Mistura said Wednesday that Russia, a key regime backer, asked Damascus to halt airstrikes on rebel-held areas during the talks, which are expected to continue into next week. "I'm not expecting a breakthrough . . . but a beginning of a series of rounds that should enable to go much more in depth on the substantive issues that are required for a political solution in Syria," Mr. de Mistura said.

Islamic State is excluded from the Geneva talks and has been losing territory across Syria and Iraq as many forces -- some also at war with one another -- have battled the militants.

Which force will lead the battle to take Raqqa has been the subject of much diplomatic debate. Turkey, an important U.S. ally in the fight against Islamic State, has been pushing to sideline the Kurdish-led SDF, a U.S.-backed force fighting the terror group elsewhere in Syria, in favor of one dominated by Arab rebel fighters. Raqqa is a predominantly Arab city. But U.S. officials have long maintained that it would be difficult to launch a successful assault on Raqqa without the Kurdish YPG militia that leads the SDF.

On Thursday, rebel forces supported by the Turkish military were already clearing mines and other explosives laid by Islamic State throughout al-Bab, reported Turkey's state-run Anadolu news agency.

---

Nour Alakraa and Noam Raydan contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170224ed2o0001w
