us
Jim Mattis Seeks to Soothe Tensions in Japan and South Korea

By MICHAEL R. GORDON and CHOE SANG-HUN 
1,059 words
5 February 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —resident Trump relishes referring to his new defense secretary, Jim Mattis, as “ad Dog.”r. Mattis has never liked the nickname, which he argues is a news media invention. But to the commander in chief, it signifies a man who knows how to take the fight to the enemy and win.

During his recent alliance-mending mission in Asia, however, Mr. Mattis was more loyal friend than attack dog, hailed as a welcome voice of sober restraint.

“e appeared calm and considerate to allies despite his nickname,”aid Kookmin Ilbo, a South Korean daily newspaper. “houghtful and diligent”as the verdict of the Mainichi Shimbun, a major Japanese newspaper. Even the daily Tokyo Sports weighed in, describing Mr. Mattis as the “nly sensible person in the Trump administration.”

The mission, the first overseas trip by a top member of the Trump administration’ national security team, was intended to shore up relations with two essential allies, South Korea and Japan. It required a tricky balance: standing firm against North Korea’ saber rattling and China’ territorial ambitions in the South China Sea —tances that come naturally to a defense secretary —hile also reassuring allies made nervous by Mr. Trump’ campaign talk about pulling back from American security commitments in Asia.

The task was all the more challenging given the administration’ mixed signals on foreign policy and Mr. Mattis’ testimony to Congress that he was reluctant to repeat the Obama administration’ language about “ebalancing”r pivoting to Asia, because it implied that the United States was turning away from its defense obligations elsewhere.

South Korea, which remains technically at war with the nuclear-armed North Korea, cherishes its strong alliance with the United States. But in a nation still scarred by the Korean War, many are concerned that a hawkish American administration might escalate tensions with the North. They fear that could disrupt their export-driven economy and even lead to an armed conflict with the North under its unpredictable young leader, Kim Jong-un.

During his two-day visit to Seoul, which was his first stop, Mr. Mattis pushed to deploy an antimissile system known as Thaad, short for Terminal High Altitude Area Defense, which would be used to intercept North Korea’ medium-range missiles. In a stark warning to Pyongyang, he said that any use of nuclear weapons by North Korea would be met with an “verwhelming”esponse.

But Mr. Mattis also sought to remind South Koreans of the United States’ast sacrifices for their country and its commitment to their defense.

During a meeting with his South Korean counterpart, Defense Minister Han Min-koo, Mr. Mattis recalled how he had come to South Korea for training in the 1970s when he was a young Marine lieutenant based in Okinawa, Japan. He fondly remembered a Sergeant Chung, a South Korean marine who shared some kimchi with him. He also noted that he had commanded the First Marine Division, which had fought in 1950 in the Chosin Reservoir battle of the Korean War.

Such comments clearly resonated with Mr. Han and top Defense Ministry officials, all of whom are retired or serving military officers and who have had close interactions with American troops. Mr. Mattis is a retired four-star general.

“‘ad Dog’attis in South Korea was unexpectedly soft,”ead a headline in OhMyNews, a widely read online newspaper. It observed that Mr. Mattis, despite his nickname, was considered the most prudent among Trump administration officials when it came to military action because he had seen what war was like.

In Japan, Mr. Mattis sought to carry out a similar balancing act. During the campaign, Mr. Trump threatened to walk away from the mutual defense pact unless the Japanese did more to reimburse the United States more for defending their territory.

But speaking at a joint news conference with his Japanese counterpart on Saturday, Mr. Mattis said that the United States stood by the pact, reiterating that the American defense commitment extended to disputed islands in the East China Sea, known in Japan as the Senkaku and in China as the Diaoyu. Mr. Mattis also described Japan as “ model of cost sharing”nd praised the administration of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe for increasing spending on the military.

Strikingly, Mr. Mattis expressed caution about using military force. In contrast, Rex W. Tillerson, Mr. Trump’ new secretary of state, suggested during his confirmation hearing that the United States should be prepared to block China’ access to the islands that it has claimed in the South China Sea and built up with airfields, ports and weapons.

“e’e going to have to send China a clear signal that first, the island-building stops, and second, your access to those islands is also not going to be allowed,”r. Tillerson told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee last month.

Mr. Mattis has long argued that diplomacy should be backed up by military might, but that force should not be the first recourse. In the case of the South China Sea, he said, it is the diplomats who should be carrying the ball.

“here is no need right now at this time for military maneuvers or something like that,”aid Mr. Mattis, who described the dispute as “omething that’ best solved by the diplomats.”

With the Trump administration in flux, and the potential for surprises from North Korea and China, it seems likely that there will be fresh challenges. But for now, Mr. Mattis appears to have succeeded in his reassurance mission in Seoul and Tokyo.

“ords matter enormously over there,”aid Michael O’anlon, a military expert at the Brookings Institution. “ot only did Mattis say all the right things on issues ranging from Thaad to the Senkaku/Diaoyu to the strength of alliances to the need for a firm but steady and nondramatic U.S. approach to the South China Sea, he also went with a listening ear and little bravado. Things are definitely better, at least for the moment.”

Michael R. Gordon reported from Washington, and Choe Sang-Hun from Seoul, South Korea. Makiko Inoue contributed reporting from Tokyo.

* Trump Will Call for a Pentagon Plan to Hit \b ISIS\b0  Harder, Officials Say

Document INHT000020170206ed250000i
