Foreign Desk; SECTA
U.S. Soldier Killed in Mission Against  ISIS  in Afghanistan

By MUJIB MASHAL and FAHIM ABED 
471 words
10 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- An American Special Forces soldier was killed in eastern Afghanistan during a joint operation with Afghan forces against affiliates of the Islamic State, officials said on Sunday.

''The soldier was mortally wounded late Saturday during an operation in Nangarhar Province,'' Capt. Bill Salvin, a spokesman for the American forces in Afghanistan, said.

The death was the first American casualty in Afghanistan from hostile fire since the beginning of the year, according to a tally kept by the website iCasualties. Last year, 13 American soldiers died in the country, 10 because of enemy fire. In total, 2,217 American soldiers have died in Afghanistan since the invasion in 2001 and another 20,000 have been wounded, according to the Pentagon.

About 8,400 American soldiers remain in Afghanistan, carrying out two missions -- one under NATO's mission to train and assist Afghan forces, and a second counterterrorism mission focused on Al Qaeda and affiliates of the Islamic State. The United States commander in Afghanistan, Gen. John W. Nicholson, has expressed the need for thousands more American soldiers ahead of what is expected to be a tough fighting season.

Saturday's operation happened in the Achin district, which has remained the hotbed of an Islamic State affiliate even as operations by Afghan and American forces have struck heavy blows to the group in neighboring areas.

Jawid Salim, a spokesman for the Afghan commando forces, said the American soldier was accompanying Afghan special forces in an operation in Shadal Bazaar and he was mortally wounded by a roadside bomb. ''The soldier was on foot,'' he said.

Malik Kamin, a tribal elder in Shadal Bazaar, said the area had been the front line of fighting, but the Islamic State-affiliated fighters had been pushed back about six miles during operations in the past two weeks.

''We didn't see American soldiers in Achin and Shadal Bazaar before, but 15 days ago when the anti-I.S. operation started Americans also came here and they are helping Afghan forces,'' Mr. Kamin said. ''There is constant heavy fighting and airstrikes and drones.''

In a news conference last week, Captain Salvin said the goal of the United States counterterrorism mission in Afghanistan for 2017 was to eliminate the remaining Islamic State-affiliated pockets. To that end, the mission had carried out an intense campaign of airstrikes against the Islamic State affiliates, as well as the remnants of Al Qaeda, with about 560 strikes in the first months of the year so far, more than a hundred of those since the beginning of April. He said the Islamic State-affiliated group had lost two-thirds of its territory and about half of its fighters over the past year.

Document NYTF000020170410ed4a0003p
