World; Middle East
Suicide Bombers Kill Dozens at Wedding Party in Iraq

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
466 words
9 March 2017
14:11
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD —uicide bombers struck a village north of Baghdad as a wedding party gathered in the evening, killing at least 26 people and wounding scores more, a government spokesman said on Thursday.

The assault began late Wednesday when an attacker wearing an explosives-laden belt walked into the wedding party at an open area in Hajaj, near the city of Tikrit, about 120 miles north of Baghdad.

After the bomber detonated his explosives, a second attacker blew himself up after people had gathered to help the victims of the first blast, a provincial spokesman, Ali al-Hamdani, told The Associated Press.

There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the attack, which left about 67 people wounded, but suspicion is likely to fall on the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL.

The wedding party was being held for a family that had been displaced from Anbar Province, which is in western Iraq and is home to a major tribe opposed to the Islamic State.

The Islamic State captured Tikrit during its blitz across Iraq in the summer of 2014, when the militant group seized nearly a third of the country’ territory.

Iraqi forces drove the militants from Tikrit in April 2015, but the Islamic State has maintained the ability to stage deadly attacks in and around the city.

The Islamic State has used large-scale terrorist assaults in an effort to distract from its losses as government forces battle to retake all of Mosul, Iraq’ second-largest city.

Iraqi forces have over the past week fought their way into the heart of the western part of Mosul, which is separated from the eastern sector by the Tigris River, capturing a government complex and the city’ antiquities museum, where militants have destroyed priceless relics.

Mosul also fell to the Islamic State in the summer of 2014, along with large swaths of northern and western Iraq, but it is now the only significant urban area in the country under the group’ control.

* Iraqi Army Cements Hold on Tikrit, but Islamic State Sends a Message

* Hungry, Thirsty and Bloodied in Battle to Retake Mosul From \b ISIS\b0 

* Sunni Militants Drive Iraqi Army Out of Mosul

* Iraqi Forces Take Eastern Mosul From Islamic State

* Iraqi Forces Enter Western Mosul, in Fierce Battle Against \b ISIS\b0 

* A Times Photographer’ Inside Look at the War on \b ISIS\b0  in Mosul

* \b ISIS\b0  Keeps Hold in Tikrit as Iraq Pauses Offensive

* After Victory Over \b ISIS\b0  in Tikrit, Next Battle Requires a New Template

Iraqi soldiers in western Mosul on Thursday. Islamic State militants have used large-scale terrorist attacks to distract from its losses in Mosul, Iraq’ second-largest city. | Zohra Bensemra/Reuters 

Document NYTFEED020170309ed390048t
