World News: Iraq: U.S. To Bolster Help in  ISIS  Fight

By Felicia Schwartz and Tamer El-Ghobashy 
467 words
22 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON -- The U.S. pledged to speed up its support to Iraq in the fight against Islamic State, Iraq's prime minister said following a White House meeting with President Donald Trump.

"We have been given assurances that the support will not only continue but accelerate," Haider al-Abadi said at an event at the U.S. Institute of Peace, a Washington-based think tank, on Monday.

Mr. Abadi spoke shortly after he left a meeting with Mr. Trump and other senior officials, including Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, senior presidential adviser Jared Kushner and national security adviser Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster.

His consultations came as the Trump administration is evaluating its approach to confronting Islamic State and other extremist groups in the Middle East and reviewing options that may include sending more troops to help advise local forces. It has already loosened some battlefield rules, including by giving some commanders more authority on the ground.

"We will figure something out. I mean we have to get rid of ISIS. We're going to get rid of ISIS," Mr. Trump said at the start of his meeting with Mr. Abadi.

The White House said after the meeting that the two leaders discussed military cooperation in the fight against Islamic State, also known as Daesh, the Arabic acronym for the extremist group.

"Although ISIS/Da'esh remains a dangerous enemy, we are confident it will be defeated," the White House said in what it described as a joint statement. "As Iraqi forces consolidate gains against ISIS/Da'esh, the two leaders agreed that the United States and Iraq will pursue a long-term partnership to decisively root out terrorism from Iraq and strengthen the Iraqi military and other key institutions."

The officials also discussed strengthening economic ties as Iraq prepares for the end of the campaign against Islamic State and the U.S. said it supported Iraq's efforts to strengthen regional ties.

Mr. Abadi is expected to join a meeting in Washington this week of officials of more than 65 nations in the coalition against the extremist group.

Iraqi government forces, meanwhile, continued to make halting advances against Islamic State in western Mosul, where they are engaged in fierce street fighting in the most complicated section of Iraq's second-largest city.

The fighting has taken a dramatic toll on the civilians.

Mr. Abadi said he hadn't seen the Trump administration's full plan to combat the extremist group in Iraq and Syria, but he was confident its strategy would be effective.

"I know there's a plan," he said. "We have our own plan."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170321ed3m0000v
