Tillerson Can End the Qatar Standoff

By Dennis Ross 
758 words
2 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A17
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Defeating Islamic State is the Trump administration's most important national-security priority. But removing ISIS from Mosul and Raqqa may end up meaning little absent the ability to secure, reconstruct and govern these and other cities. Preventing a dangerous power vacuum from forming in areas liberated from ISIS control requires the urgent involvement of unified Sunni Arab states.

Unfortunately, the Saudis, Emiratis, Bahrainis and Egyptians are currently distracted by a diplomatic imbroglio with Qatar over its support for Hamas and the Muslim Brotherhood. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson has tried to mediate, but he erred by traveling to the region before negotiating a plan for ending the conflict. Good statecraft requires making it unacceptable to say "no" to the U.S.

Already there are signs that both sides may be more amenable to a face-saving settlement. The Saudi-led coalition has softened its original 13 demands, which included shutting down Al Jazeera and closing a Turkish military base. Instead they are asking for Qatar to act on a set of principles, including combating terrorism and extremism, denying financing and safe haven to terrorist groups, ending incitement of hatred, and refraining from interfering in the internal affairs of other countries.

These principles are broad enough to create space for both sides to reach understandings, and Qatar's emir, Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, has said he is open to dialogue.

The Al-Thani regime allows the U.S. to use Al Udeid Air Base and has invited American universities such as Northwestern, Texas A&M and Georgetown to open campuses in Qatar. Yet the tiny oil-rich emirate also hosts senior Taliban leaders, supports radical Islamists in Libya and Syria, and finances media platforms for the Muslim Brotherhood to broadcast its message. Any resolution to the conflict must ensure that Qatar gives up this double game.

Assuming that Mr. Tillerson has the support of President Trump, the former Exxon CEO should quietly but bluntly inform all sides how the standoff will end -- with Qatar implementing its recently signed memorandum of understanding with the U.S. on terror financing, committing to arresting or expelling all those that the U.S. has designated as supporters or facilitators of terror, and ceasing to provide material support to any group that the U.S. deems a threat to regional stability.

Mr. Tillerson must make clear that if the Qataris balk, the U.S. will withdraw its forces from Al Udied. This is the type of threat that should concentrate Mr. Al-Thani's thinking. The Qataris view the American military presence as a security guarantee. Preventing a U.S. withdrawal gives them the political cover they need to end the current standoff. The last thing the Qataris want is to be seen giving in to the Saudis.

Effective American intervention now is necessary for several reasons. A wounded ISIS could exploit the current confusion to regain its strength. Iran and its Shiite militias are already positioning themselves to fill any power vacuum in both Iraq and Syria, further destabilizing the region. And, for Mr. Tillerson, his future effectiveness as secretary of state could depend on it.

Mr. Tillerson's reluctance or inability to fill out senior State Department positions and the Trump administration's often contradictory messaging have cast doubt on his ability to speak for the president. This is an untenable position for a secretary of state. Mr. Tillerson needs to demonstrate that he can solve diplomatic problems by exercising leverage and producing results. He needs to put a win on the board, lest America's partners and adversaries begin to question whether it makes sense to work with him.

The most effective secretaries of state were characterized not by their strategic brilliance but their unmistakable authority. No one questioned whether Henry Kissinger or James Baker spoke for the president. The power and authority they exuded made their threats and inducements believable. Without leverage, diplomacy rarely works.

Unlike Messrs. Kissinger and Baker, Mr. Tillerson can't count on the White House's messaging to reinforce his diplomacy. Unless he wants to see his authority slowly erode over time, Mr. Tillerson needs a high-profile diplomatic success -- and soon. The standoff with Qatar provides a perfect opportunity.

---

Mr. Ross has held senior national security positions in several presidential administrations and is counselor at the Washington Institute.

(See related letter: "Letters to the Editor: End Qatar's Policy of Strategic Ambiguity" -- WSJ August 8, 2017)

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170802ed820000c
