World
U.S., Afghan Forces Assess Damage to  ISIS  From Massive Bomb; ‘other of All Bombs' targeted a militant cave-and-tunnel complex in eastern Afghanistan

By Jessica Donati and Habib Khan Totakhil 
1,323 words
14 April 2017
18:35
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

The U.S. strikes on a Syrian air base occurred on April 7. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated the strikes were on April 6. (April 14, 2017)

KABUL—.S. and Afghan forces on Friday were on the ground assessing the damage caused by a nearly 22,000-pound American bomb that targeted an Islamic State cave-and-tunnel complex in eastern Afghanistan.

The bomb, one of the largest conventional weapons in the U.S. arsenal, was dropped on the militant stronghold in Nangarhar province's Achin district on Thursday, shaking homes and shattering windows more than a mile away, residents said.

It was the second high-profile U.S. military strike in a week. Two U.S. destroyers

fired nearly 60 Tomahawk cruise missiles at an air base in Syria on April 7 in retaliation for a suspected sarin gas attack by the government on a rebel-held town in Idlib province.

The top U.S. military commander in the Afghanistan, Army Gen. John Nicholson, said it was too early to say how many militants had been killed in Thursday's bombing. The Afghan Defense Ministry retracted an earlier statement that the strike had killed 36 militants, saying it was too early to provide precise figures. Gen. Nicholson also indicated that he made the decision to drop the bomb.

"The ammunition we used last night is designed to destroy caves and tunnels. This was the right weapon against the right target," he told reporters Friday. "I am fortunate that my chain of command allow me the latitude to make assessments on the ground."

A military official for the coalition who viewed footage of the bombing said it was difficult to make out details of its effects beyond a "mushroom cloud" of smoke rising into the sky. He added that there was a second bomb available for use in the country, but no decision yet had been made on whether it should be deployed.

Islamic State's Amaq news agency posted a statement on Friday saying that none of its fighters were killed or wounded in the strike.

There were no immediate reports from U.S. or Afghan officials on possible civilian casualties from the airstrike. Residents who live near the bomb's target spoke Friday of hearing a terrifying explosion.

"We could see the flames of the blast for minutes after the bomb was dropped," said Israr Shinwari, who lives about a mile from where the bomb—nown as the Massive Ordnance Air Blast and nicknamed the "Mother of All Bombs"—it. "We were all horrified."

Thursday's bombing occurred during an offensive by U.S. and Afghan special forces in eastern Afghanistan against Islamic State's Afghan branch, which calls itself Khorasan Province. Previous offensives against the group have pushed the militants back, but they have typically returned.

Some local residents said the strike was intended mainly to send a general message to America's enemies, not clear the tunnel-and-cave complex. U.S. military officials say that Russia and Iran are supporting the Taliban, presenting a challenge to coalition efforts to curb the insurgency. Russian officials have denied such assistance and said they maintain contacts with the group for their own security.

Moscow on Friday offered a mixed reaction to the news from Afghanistan. Russian Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov said the campaign against Islamic State was "our common goal," news agency Interfax reported.

But Igor Morozov, a Russian senator, said the use of the bomb threatened to spark a new arms race.

"The U.S. test of a new bomb in Afghanistan is an attempt at world domination through a kind of military threat that threatens with a new round of the arms race," he said, according to the news agency RIA-Novosti.

Also on Friday, the Russian government hosted a round of consultations on Afghan issues with representatives from the governments of Afghanistan, India, Iran, China, Pakistan, and the Central Asian states of the former Soviet Union. The U.S., which Russia said was invited, didn't take part.

According to a statement from the Russian foreign ministry, the participants emphasized that "the crisis in Afghanistan does not have a military solution."

Reactions in Afghanistan also ranged between support and condemnation.

The Afghan government praised the decision to drop the bomb, saying on Friday that the bombing had been coordinated with Afghan forces. It had said earlier it had no advance notice of plans to drop the bomb.

The government's "message to all terrorist groups is that Afghanistan is not the safe haven for terrorists and there is no place for them to shelter," said Shah Hussain Murtazawi, a spokesman for Afghan President Ashraf Ghani.

Others in Afghanistan accused the U.S. military of using the country as a testing ground for new weapons and a means of sending messages to rival powers.

"This was just a show of force. The target wasn't Daesh," said Asif Shinwari, a civil-rights activist and native of Achin, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

The Taliban—hich is threatening to wrest control of at least half a dozen provinces and sometimes works with Islamic State—alled the attack a "great crime" on the part of the Americans.

Afghanistan's former president, Hamid Karzai, said it represented a "most brutal misuse of our country as testing ground for new and dangerous…eapons," according to a series of posts on his Twitter account.

The Trump administration has yet to announce its plans in Afghanistan, but many expect the new U.S. president to deliver on the request by Gen. Nicholson for an increase the number of U.S. troops in the country, from its current level of about 8,500.

There also are some 6,000 soldiers in Afghanistan from other members of the international coalition, which is in the country in support of the central government in Kabul.

Islamic State Khorasan Province sometimes cooperates with the Taliban, and sometimes fights for influence. The Iocal Islamic State affiliate has joined the Taliban in carrying out high-profile attacks in the capital, which could suggest that Taliban commanders that formerly carried out attacks for the Taliban are now calling themselves Islamic State.

The U.S. and its allies worry a campaign to defeat Islamic State in Iraq and Syria could push fighters back into Afghanistan, where vast, ungoverned spaces offer militant groups freedom to operate. Afghan and allied officials report anecdotal examples of Islamic State commanders from the Middle East appearing in Afghanistan, but there are no signs yet of large concentrations of foreign fighters.

President Barack Obamaauthorized the military to begin combat operations targeting Islamic State in January last year, more than a year after the militant group emerged in eastern Afghanistan. Since then, the U.S. military has carried out near daily airstrikes targeting the group and have killed a number of its leaders, only for new ones to emerge. The U.S.-backed estimates the group's members in Afghanistan range from a few hundred to several thousand.

At its peak, Islamic State controlled parts of about a dozen districts in Nangarhar province.

One reason for the group's success is disaffection within the Taliban, which has been fighting the U.S. and its allies in the country for some 16 years and has grown increasingly divided since the death of its leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar. A U.S. drone strike killed his successor and the current leader is seen as a weak figure struggling to win the respect of powerful Taliban commanders in the south.

Nathan Hodge in Moscow contributed to this article.

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com

More Coverage

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  in Afghanistan

* Bomb Built Partly as Psychological Deterrent

* The ‘other of All Bombs': Fast Facts

* Why U.S. Dropped ‘other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0 

Document WSJO000020170414ed4e00335
