Business World
What if Paddock Were al Qaeda?

By Holman W. Jenkins, Jr. 
863 words
4 October 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A15
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Those who say gun control is the answer to massacres like Sunday's in Las Vegas are really saying they are willing to live with such outrages.

Gun-control proposals always float up in the aftermath of mass shootings, singularly detached from any plan that could be carried out, much less command majority support from the U.S. electorate. A law banning gun sales is not in the cards. A law seriously curtailing private gun ownership, as exists in the U.K., is not in the cards. If it were, enforcing it would be a whole other nightmare.

Non-meaningful gun regulations, in fact, were the specialty of a Democratic senator who long represented Nevada, scene of Sunday's killings. Harry Reid had a lifetime "B" rating from the National Rifle Association. A New York Times columnist on Monday, under the web headline "Preventing Mass Shootings Like the Vegas Strip Attack," proposed eight steps that, whatever their slight utility in lowering the rate of other kinds of gun crimes and suicides, even the writer admitted would have no "overwhelming effect" on gun deaths, let alone mass shootings.

Mass shootings of the modern ilk are a lot more like terrorist attacks than they are like routine gun crimes, in which guns are used to settle an argument, facilitate a robbery or eliminate a rival.

Mass shootings typically involve a substantial measure of planning and preparation. Stephen Paddock walked into a luxury hotel -- correction, he walked into a hotel-casino, where it's part of the business model to know and watch customers carefully -- with 23 weapons, ammo and related equipment. Here's a question: Do you think Paddock, if he had also spent 30 minutes on an al Qaeda or ISIS website, would have been allowed to get this far?

America's surveillance state -- yes, we have one -- finds what it's programmed to look for.

The actor John Leguizamo is currently seen on New York TV in a public-service ad singing the praise of license-plate readers that have replaced tollbooths and will snap your picture and send you a bill in the mail. Google and other ad servers know -- God, do they know -- if you happen to be interested in motorcycles. Facebook, until it discovered media blowback, allowed its algorithms to service anyone seeking to market his wares to self-identified "Jew haters."

Microsoft showed that search-engine queries can predict with a degree of accuracy who will be subsequently diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. Has anybody tried to reconstruct the electronic history of recent mass shooters to see if their actions might also have been predictable?

Mark Barton, a day trader, killed nine people at two Atlanta trading firms in 1999 after losing a bunch of money on internet stocks. He vowed revenge on those who "greedily sought my destruction." Paddock is said to have been worth $2 million thanks to real-estate investments, and to have spent his last years living the life of a "professional casino gambler."

These two claims would seem a tad incompatible. Casino odds are designed to favor the house (otherwise there wouldn't be a casino business). Anybody who plays for an extended period can expect to empty his bank account and fill the casino's. "Professional casino gambler" is a polite term for somebody psychologically addicted to losing money.

What's more, casinos keep tabs on how much their best customers are spending and losing. They are obliged by law to report to the federal government cash transactions of more than $10,000, which Paddock was in the habit of making. If they haven't already, casinos surely will be deploying face recognition as part of their careful monitoring of their premises.

Like Mark Barton, it wouldn't be surprising to learn that Paddock decided to go on a killing spree after gambling away his fortune. It wouldn't be surprising to learn he wasn't a normal, balanced person who just "snapped" -- Mark Barton was shown in the aftermath to have been a demonstrable psychopath whom the law never quite managed to catch up with.

This column has always been partial to Dean Martin's theory of gun control. The singer was arrested with an illegal weapon in his car. When asked by a reporter if everybody should carry a gun, he joked, "No, just me."

Unfortunately, this is not a realistic basis for legislating for 330 million people. Let's stop covering our eyes with respect to the potential of big data. As a top U.S. intelligence official pointed out after 9/11, nearly every transaction and communication nowadays leaves an electronic trail -- if we could only make use of it.

The information exists. It would be a job for algorithms, not human snoops, to rake through the unimaginable piles of data for the telltale patterns. Protection of privacy could be programmed into such a system, with rules specifying how such information can be surfaced for human consideration. So let's at least be willing to find out what the potential is.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020171004eda400017
