World
Syrians Caught in Crossfire as Fight Against  ISIS  Heats Up; Civilian casualties have shot up recently in Deir Ezzour province, where the extremists have a stronghold

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,019 words
14 October 2017
14:01
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

Deir Ezzour24 estimates there are about 100 civilians still stuck in the eastern city of Mayadeen. An earlier version of this article incorrectly put the estimate at about 100,000. (Oct. 14, 2017)

Civilian casualties have surged in the frenzied battles to drive Islamic State from its stronghold in the oil-rich Syrian province of Deir Ezzour, where U.S.-led forces and the Russian-backed regime are conducting separate campaigns against the extremists, according to activists and human-rights groups.

As both sides race to make territorial gains in Deir Ezzour, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nations and activists have called for greater measures to protect civilians caught in the middle of the fighting there and elsewhere.

"While we all recognize that the fighting against ISIL is important, we need to remember that the civilians cannot be punished twice," U.N. Special Envoy for Syria Staffan de Mistura told the U.N. Security Council late last month, using an acronym for Islamic State. "Already because they have been under the rule of ISIL and then because they happen to be unlucky enough to be there when the fighting goes on."

More than 231 civilian deaths have been documented in Deir Ezzour province since Sept. 28, said Omar Abu Leila, who heads the monitoring group Deir Ezzour24, which opposes both Islamic State and the Bashar al-Assad regime.

With Islamic State clinging to a fast-shrinking swath of territory in Syria, the battlefield against the terror group has become more congested. On Thursday, the regime, backed by Russian airstrikes, said it was advancing deeper into the western neighborhoods of the strategic city of Mayadeen in Deir Ezzour, days after encircling it.

Islamic State has ushered its leadership and most valued equipment—ncluding military gear and prisoners—nto Mayadeen over the past year as it has been routed from other areas in Syria and Iraq. The city sits near Syria's most important oil fields, which Islamic State controls and uses to fund its operations.

With so much strategic importance for Islamic State, the militants are expected to put up a stiff fight for Mayadeen. Deir Ezzour24 estimates there are about 100 civilians still stuck in the city and living under intense airstrikes. About 20 people were killed on Oct. 6 in Russian airstrikes on the outskirts of Mayadeen and their bodies haven't yet been retrieved because of the bombardment, Mr. Abu Leila said.

The Russian military on Tuesday confirmed that heavy aerial bombardment was continuing in the Deir Ezzour region, saying that its warplanes were carrying out up to 150 airstrikes a day.

Russia consistently denies targeting civilians, and often criticizes monitoring groups for being Western propagandists or militant sympathizers.

On Thursday, Unicef said it had received reports that an attack on its vaccine cold room in Mayadeen had destroyed at least 140,000 doses of vaccines. Mayadeen is at the center of a polio outbreak, which has so far paralyzed 48 children, according to Unicef.

Since the battles against Islamic State kicked off in Deir Ezzour last month, thousands of civilians have fled the fighting. Western diplomats say the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State was caught off guard by how quickly the regime advanced and rushed to start its own offensive there.

"The biggest danger for civilians is from above," said Sarmad al-Jilani, an activist with Sound and Picture, a group documenting human-rights violations in eastern Syria. "The Russian and Syrian planes are carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance for the regime army. And the coalition is carrying out airstrikes to enable the advance" of their allied ground forces.

The Syrian regime has consistently denied that its warplanes target civilians.

The U.S.-led coalition said there has been no change to its rules of engagement in Deir Ezzour, despite the accelerated battle plan there. It said it continues to take every practical measure into consideration to ensure that civilians aren't harmed.

"The battlespace in and around [Deir Ezzour] is complex and congested, with multiple actors operating on both sides of the Euphrates River to defeat our common enemy, ISIS," the U.S. coalition said in response to questions. "Ultimately, the coalition believes that ISIS is the root cause of the death and destruction."

The intensification of airstrikes in Deir Ezzour has come as there has been a spike in violence across other parts of Syria, including areas under cease-fire deals such as the rebel-held northern province of Idlib.

In Idlib, about 150 civilians were killed by regime and Russian airstrikes in a period of less than two weeks in late September, according to the opposition group Syrian Network for Human Rights.

On Sept. 26, the Russian Defense Ministry denied reports from the opposition monitoring group Syrian Observatory for Human Rights that Russian airstrikes in Idlib had killed dozens of civilians and instead said its attacks were on "terrorists."

September was the bloodiest month so far this year, with more than 3,000 people—bout 1,000 of them civilians—illed across the country, according to the Observatory.

The Red Cross said last week that levels of violence across Syria are the worst since the monthslong battle for the city of Aleppo last year.

In Deir Ezzour, civilians trying to flee the battles must use dangerous routes. On Oct. 4, nearly 100 people were killed in three attacks along the Euphrates River when suspected Russian warplanes carried out airstrikes on ferryboats carrying civilians fleeing the violence, according to Mr. Jilani and Deir Ezzour24. Photos and videos posted online in the wake of the attack showed parts of the river red with blood, according to activists.

As a result of the intense airstrikes from multiple sides, Airwars, an independent monitoring group that tracks civilian casualties in Syria and Iraq, has had trouble saying which side is responsible for specific attacks in which civilians are injured or killed.

"It's chaos," said Kinda Haddad, head of the Syria team at Airwars.

Nazih Osseiran and Nathan Hodge contributed to this article.

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020171013edad001me
