Foreign Desk; SECT
Pro-Government Forces in Syria Break  ISIS  Siege of Eastern City

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
462 words
6 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
The New York Times on the Web
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT, Lebanon -- Backed by Russian and Iranian firepower, the Syrian forces of President Bashar al-Assad reached besieged troops on Tuesday at a garrison in Deir al-Zour, a city in eastern Syria, breaking a nearly three-year blockade by Islamic State militants.

Re-entering Deir al-Zour would move the Syrian forces and their allied Iranian-backed militias a step closer to controlling the oil-rich eastern province of the same name, which borders Iraq. Such a move would also expand Iran's influence in the area.

But it could still take weeks, if not months, for Mr. Assad's forces to retake all of Deir al-Zour from the militant group, which controls about 60 percent of its neighborhoods.

Mr. Assad congratulated his troops on breaking the siege, calling it a ''resounding victory'' against the militants and vowed to forge ahead until ''the last inch'' of Syrian territory was liberated. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, whose military had fired cruise missiles at Islamic States targets near the city, called it a ''strategically important victory over terrorists.''

Mr. Assad's critics called it an alarming development.

''It opens the whole province for Iran and its agents there,'' said Mozahem al-Salloum, an opposition activist from Deir al-Zour who has been in exile since 2013.

Militias backed by Iran and the Lebanese militant organization Hezbollah form the core of the pro-Assad forces advancing on Deir al-Zour, Mr. Salloum said.

Iran has been seeking to secure a land corridor from its territory, through Iraq, to the Mediterranean to give it unhindered access to its allies in Syria and Lebanon. Control of Deir al-Zour is a major step forward for that plan.

The advances by the Syrian troops could provide some relief for the tens of thousands of civilians trapped in the four government-controlled neighborhoods that have been surrounded by the extremists since 2015. The Syrian government estimates that 70,000 people have survived on erratic airdrops of food and supplies during the siege.

Activists said, however, that the new access road could not yet be used for delivering humanitarian assistance because it was still under attack from Islamic State fighters.

Since 2015, the Syrian government and the Islamic State have controlled separate sections of Deir al-Zour, Syria's largest eastern city. Extremists hold the province and are expected to fight their last battles there.

The Islamic State fighters have lost all other major cities they once controlled, including Mosul and Tal Afar in Iraq. Forces backed by the United States are bearing down on Raqqa, the Islamic States' self-proclaimed capital, which is northwest of Deir al-Zour.

Document NYTF000020170906ed9600060
