World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,065 words
27 June 2017
13:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

A 'Bona Fide' Decision

The Supreme Court on Monday allowed President Trump's administration to implement part of his temporary ban on travelers from six Muslim-majority countries. The court said it would give full consideration to whether the president's actions were lawful when it hears the case in October. The Supreme Court's action is a significant reversal of fortune for Mr. Trump, who had been on the losing end of several lower-court decisions that blocked his March 6 executive order. The justices, in an unsigned 13-page opinion, narrowed the scope of the ban for now, ruling that the president couldn't enforce it against travelers "who have a credible claim of a bona fide relationship" with a person or organization in the U.S. The court allowed a similarly limited version of a ban on refugees to take effect. Monday was also a landmark day for religious-expression issues at the Supreme Court.

Bill of Health

The Senate Republican health-care overhaul would swell the ranks of the uninsured by about 22 million and cut the cumulative federal deficit by $321 billion over the next decade compared with the current Affordable Care Act, according to an estimate released Monday by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office. That assessment threw into doubt whether the bill would make it past an initial procedural hurdle. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell was engaged in last-minute negotiations with more than a half-dozen GOP lawmakers wavering in their support of the legislation. Sen. Susan Collins said she would vote against the bill, citing the CBO's report. The American Medical Association also declared its opposition. However, insurer Anthem said it believed the legislation would bring stability to the individual insurance market.

Mobile Networking

Sprint has entered into exclusive talks with Charter Communications and Comcast as the cable companies explore a deal that could bolster their plans to offer wireless service. Sprint Chairman Masayoshi Son and the cable providers have entered into a two-month, exclusive agreement for discussions through late July, putting merger talks between Sprint and T-Mobile on hold. One possible arrangement would have Charter and Comcast invest in improving Sprint's network in exchange for favorable terms to offer wireless service using the carrier's network. Such a deal could provide much better terms than the cable companies' existing network-resale agreement with Verizon. The arrangement could involve Charter and Comcast taking an equity stake in Sprint or jointly acquiring the company, though the latter scenario is thought to be much less likely.

Arrivederci, Tourists

Tourism is an important revenue source in Italy, but many residents would prefer that visitors—t least some of them—tay away. The number of tourists arriving in Italy topped 52 million in 2016, up nearly 30% since 2000. Each year, Venice sees 15 million day trippers pour into an area five times the size of New York's Central Park. The Cinque Terre, the tiny fishing villages on the Italian Riviera, drew 2.5 million visitors last year, 500 times the local population. Recent incidents, such as two tourists swimming nude in Rome's Trevi Fountain and another diving off the Rialto Bridge in Venice, have only strengthened officials' determination to find ways to keep the hordes at bay. However, efforts to limit incoming visitors are colliding with legal, business and practical challenges.

Today's Video

Big Brother

Once the stuff of science fiction, facial-scanning cameras are becoming a part of daily life in China, where they are used for marketing, surveillance and social control.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

When the Mailman Unwittingly Becomes a Drug Dealer

Democrats' Broad Challenge: Middle-Class Appeal

WORLD

Trump Administration Warns Assad Would Pay 'Heavy Price' for Another Chemical Attack

Trump, Indian Prime Minister Modi Move to Bridge Divisions

BUSINESS

Air-Bag Maker Takata Has Plenty of Work to Do After Bankruptcy Filing 

Amazon's Grocery Ambitions Spell Trouble for Big Food Brands

MARKETS

For Sale: Puerto Rico

Why Apple and J.P. Morgan Are Chasing Venmo

Number of the Day

$2.7 billion

The amount that the European Union's antitrust regulator fined Google for favoring its own comparison-shopping service in search results. The company was ordered to apply the same methods to the services of rivals as it does to its own when displaying them in its search results.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on yesterday's Supreme Court decisions? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the evolving terror threat in Europe, Massimo Piras of Belgium said: "The more frequent and random attacks across Europe are clearly affecting people's moods. With heavily-armed soldiers more and more visible on the streets of Europe, how could it be otherwise? The near impossibility of stopping random, amateurish attacks, combined with the battle-hardened and well-trained militants flowing back into Europe as ISIS loses its twin capitals, will only worsen an already bleak situation." Jeff Templeton of Pennsylvania wrote: "One of the best reasons yet why the administration's policies on immigration need to be implemented. If it's difficult to track them, then stop them, if possible, at the gate." And Bob Jones of New Jersey commented: "With ISIS on the run, these lone-wolf attacks are the death throes of a lost cause. It will be intense for a while, but will soon end, along with any remaining lupine dreams of an Islamic caliphate."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170627ed6r001rx
