World
Australia Joins Philippines' Fight Against Islamic State-Linked Militants; Two patrol planes will back Philippine troops fighting Muslim extremists on the southern island of Mindanao

By Rob Taylor and Rachel Pannett 
735 words
23 June 2017
13:06
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Australia is sending patrol planes to the Philippines—here it has long deferred to the U.S. on security issues—s it takes a more assertive role against terror threats in Southeast Asia.

Two Australian P-3 Orion aircraft will support Philippine troops fighting the Muslim-extremist Maute  group on the southern island of Mindanao , Defense Minister Marise Payne said Friday.

The deployment marks the first time Australia has directly interceded in the long-running conflict in the southern Philippines . Just days earlier, it announced an aid package for people displaced by the fighting in the Mindanao city of Marawi.

"The regional threat from terrorism, in particular from Daesh [Islamic State] and foreign fighters, is a direct threat to Australia and our interests," Ms. Payne said Friday.

Security experts fear that disparate extremists are coalescing in Mindanao under Islamic State banner, establishing themselves in a country with a thriving illegal-arms trade and ready supply of brutal criminal factions.

The Philippine military has received training and advice from foreign powers including the U.S. and Australia—ut given the fraying ties between the U.S. and Philippines under President Rodrigo Duterte , Australia's expanding role is less contentious, analysts say. Mr. Duterte last year declared his "separation" from the U.S. , a longstanding ally.

Australian Foreign Minister Julie Bishop was one of the first senior officials to visit the Philippines following Mr. Duterte's election a year ago. On that trip she urged closer regional cooperation to prevent Islamic State from "metastasizing" and making the area a launchpad for radicalized fighters, and expressed concern about militants' declaring an Islamic caliphate in the southern Philippines.

"It's pretty clear they're trying to emulate what ISIS has done in the Middle East," said Alan Dupont, a strategic analyst at the Lowy Institute , a foreign-policy think tank in Sydney. "Marawi would be a magnet for disaffected people in Southeast Asia, including in Australia."

Australia has more at stake in the Philippines conflict than the U.S., Dr. Dupont added, because it is much closer.

The Philippines appears to be "hanging on the edge of stability," said Peter Jennings, one of Australia's top strategic advisers and the head of the government-backed Australian Strategic Policy Institute . Several hundred fighters already may have returned to Mindanao from the Middle East, he said.

Australia reached an agreement with the Philippines in 2012 allowing deeper military engagement, a deal whose roots went back a decade to a 2002 bombing on the Indonesian resort island of Bali  that killed 202 people, including 88 Australians. Several of the Islamic militants responsible fled to Mindanao, historically a haven for Indonesian terrorists.

"Looking at what Australia's now doing, it looks like a very similar response," said Malcolm Cook, senior fellow at the Iseas-Yusof Ishak Institute in Singapore.

Australia has experienced five deadly terror attacks by so-called lone-wolf assailants  since 2014, increasing worries about homegrown militancy. It has increased the powers of intelligence agencies and police  to monitor and detain suspected extremists, and to prosecute returning fighters.

Canberra, long a U.S. ally, has also sent warplanes and special forces to the war on Islamic State in Syria and Iraq.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull told a security conference in Singapore recently that Australia is willing to step up its counterterrorism efforts: Islamic State terrorists should be "killed in the field," he declared. Australia and Indonesia will jointly host a regional counterterrorism summit in August and push for more cooperation among disparate Southeast Asian nations against both foreign and homegrown militant fighters.

Facing a surge in hostage-taking by Islamic militants last year, Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines agreed to conduct joint patrols  in waters off the southwestern Philippines and allow their maritime forces to pursue suspected criminals into each other's waters. Australian defense secretary Delfin Lorenzana told The Australian newspaper on Friday the P-3 aircraft would also fly over the area.

Some of Australia's P-3s carry sophisticated signals-interception and intelligence-gathering equipment that can pick up insurgents' mobile-phone communications.

Write to Rob Taylor at rob.taylor@wsj.com  and Rachel Pannett at rachel.pannett@wsj.com  and Rachel Pannett at 

Document WSJO000020170623ed6n001uq
