N.Y. / Region
Why Giuliani Held a Secret Meeting with Turkey’ Leader

By BENJAMIN WEISER and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,506 words
20 April 2017
14:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

In late February, as the United States and the rest of the world were adjusting to President Trump and Turkey was focused on a push by its president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan  , to expand his power  , Mr. Erdogan agreed to an unusual meeting with some American visitors.

The guests included Rudolph W. Giuliani  , a former New York City mayor who had acted as a surrogate for Mr. Trump during his campaign, and another prominent lawyer, Michael B. Mukasey  , who served as attorney general in President George W. Bush’ administration.

The purpose of the   visit by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey   was rather extraordinary: They hoped to reach a diplomatic deal under which Turkey might further aid the United States’nterests in the region. In return, the United States might release the two men’ client, Reza Zarrab,   a Turkish gold trader being held in a Manhattan jail whose case had attracted Mr. Erdogan’ interest.

Mr. Mukasey, in court papers made public on Wednesday, characterized the meeting as part of an effort to seek “ state-to-state resolution of this case,”nd he hinted at some progress, saying, “enior officials in both the U.S. government and the Turkish government remain receptive to pursuing the possibility of an agreement.”

Plea bargaining, even for the best-connected of defendants, is normally conducted by defense lawyers and prosecutors, often in courthouse corridors or drab government offices. But the efforts being made on behalf of Mr. Zarrab show the way that political access and diplomatic overtures can also be employed.

Mr. Zarrab, 33, is a well-known figure in Turkey, where he moved as an infant after being born in Iran (he is a citizen of both countries). He is married to a Turkish pop star and is regarded as a member of Mr. Erdogan’ circle of friends and associates. Photographs show Mr. Erdogan’ wife, Emine, attending at least one charity event alongside Mr. Zarrab and his wife.

Mr. Zarrab had also amassed “ considerable fortune,”ccording to American prosecutors, who say his holdings included ownership in a private airplane and about 20 properties, boats, luxury automobiles and millions of dollars’orth of artwork.

In 2013, Mr. Zarrab was detained by the Turkish authorities in a wide-ranging corruption investigation of businessmen with close ties to Mr. Erdogan, who was then Turkey’ prime minister. But Mr. Zarrab used his influence with the Turkish government to win his release from prison, American prosecutors have said.

They raised the issue of what they called Mr. Zarrab’ “orrupt political connections”ast year when they argued that he not get bail in New York, where he faces charges that include   conspiring to violate the United States sanctions on Iran. He has pleaded not guilty.

Mr. Erdogan, in taking a personal interest in the case, said last year that there were “alicious”ntentions in the prosecution, and he also raised the matter with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr . during talks at the United Nations, according to Turkish news reports.

“e have to seek justice, for he is our citizen,”r. Erdogan said of Mr. Zarrab in September.

The subject of Mr. Zarrab came up again three weeks ago during a visit to Ankara, Turkey, by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson . During that visit, Turkey’ foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, accused Preet Bharara  , then the United States attorney in Manhattan, whose office first charged Mr. Zarrab, of being a pawn of anti-Turkish forces.

Mr. Bharara, who was fired by President Trump last month, had characterized Mr. Cavusoglu’ remarks as “olitical propaganda.”n Thursday, after The New York Times reported on the strategy by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey to turn the case involving Mr. Zarrab into a matter of international diplomacy, Mr. Bharara said on   reported on the strategy by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey to turn the case involving Mr. Zarrab into a matter of international diplomacy, Mr. Bharara  Twitter  , “ne just hopes that the rule of law, and its independent enforcement, still matters in the United States and at the Department of Justice.”

The efforts on Mr. Zarrab’ behalf come as Mr. Erdogan is even more powerful in Turkey, after a hotly disputed referendum that expanded his authoritarian rule   and drew a congratulatory phone call   from Mr. Trump on Monday.

Mr. Erdogan and Mr. Trump have made overtures   to each other that suggest Turkey and the United States could become closer allies.

The new court filing, by Mr. Zarrab’ lead lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, includes affidavits from Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey that make it clear they hope to get Mr. Erdogan to accept the notion that a diplomatic deal could be of mutual interest to Turkey and the United States. They wrote in the affidavits that a resolution that would be favorable for Mr. Zarrab could be “art of some agreement between the United States and Turkey that will promote the national security interests of the United States.”

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey said that it was “ardly surprising”hat senior Turkish and United States officials were receptive to a possible deal, considering that none of the transactions in which Mr. Zarrab is accused of participating “nvolved weapons or nuclear technology, or any other contraband,”nd that “urkey is situated in a part of the world strategically critical to the United States.”

Some analysts in Turkey have suggested that if Mr. Zarrab were to be freed or returned to that country, Mr. Erdogan might be more inclined to fall in line with American interests in the Middle East.

Sinan Ulgen, a former Turkish diplomat and the chairman of the Center for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies , a liberal-leaning Turkish think tank, said the strategy implied that “llowing a free pass to Zarrab and company would create good will in Ankara that Washington could use to advance its own regional agenda,”ith clearer support or at least less interference from the Turkish government.

Mr. Erdogan, for example, might be less resistant to American plans to retake Raqqa —he capital of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS —n collaboration with a Syrian Kurdish faction. Turkey regards that faction, known as the P.Y.D., as the Syrian offshoot of a proscribed militant group that operates on Turkish soil.

A swift end to the case against Mr. Zarrab, Mr. Ulgen said, might mean “urkey would be much less resistant to the U.S.’ missions in Syria, and primarily its support to the P.Y.D.”

The United States also needs Turkey to continue to allow anti-ISIS bombing missions to fly out of an air base in the southern part of the country.

Analysts supportive of Mr. Erdogan’ government contend that Mr. Zarrab’ fate is of limited interest to the Turkish state. In the view of these analysts, the charges against him are spurious and were concocted in order to smear the Turkish president.

“his Zarrab issue is not a state issue in Turkey,”aid Hasan Yalcin, strategic research director at Seta  , a government-friendly think tank in Ankara. “t’ not an issue that the Turkish state is focusing on; it’ just speculation that the Turkish state is related to Zarrab.”

State news media in Turkey reported recently that Istanbul’ chief prosecutor had opened an investigation  into Mr. Bharara   and 16 other United States-linked individuals in what Western diplomats regarded as retaliation for the Zarrab case.

The affidavits by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey were filed by Mr. Brafman, the defense lawyer, at the request of the judge, Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court. Judge Berman initially said the affidavits could be filed under seal and ex parte, meaning the government would also not be able to see them. He subsequently directed that they be filed publicly, Mr. Brafman said.

“he affidavits speak for themselves,”e said, declining to comment further.

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey wrote that both Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Mr. Bharara had been apprised “n general terms”efore the two lawyers’eetings with Mr. Erdogan and other Turkish officials. They said they had also discussed their roles with, and had been briefed by, a State Department representative in Turkey before seeing Mr. Erdogan.

Copies of Mr. Zarrab’ retainer agreements with Mr. Giuliani’ and Mr. Mukasey’ law firms were also filed with the court but were not unsealed.

* Trump Congratulates Erdogan on Turkey Vote Cementing His Rule  

* Erdogan Claims Vast Powers in Turkey After Narrow Victory in Referendum  

* Turk in Iran Sanctions Case Adds Rudy Giuliani to Legal Team  

Rudolph W. Giuliani is part of the legal team representing Reza Zarrab, a Turkish gold trader jailed in Manhattan on charges of conspiring to violate the American sanctions on Iran. | Kevin Hagen for The New York Times | Mr. Zarrab in Istanbul in 2013. | Ozan Kose/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170420ed4k00439
