Politics
Kushner, Ivanka Trump Pushed to Remove Words Critical of Climate Deal From Executive Order; President plans to issue orders aimed at rolling back Obama climate agenda soon

By Amy Harder and Peter Nicholas 
1,153 words
24 February 2017
00:10
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—t the request of President Donald Trump's son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and his wife, Ivanka Trump, language critical of a global climate deal was struck from an executive order that Mr. Trump is planning to sign soon, according to multiple people familiar with the move.

Mr. Trump is expected to sign within days at least two executive orders that will begin the process of trying to dismantle former President Barack Obama's climate and environmental regulations.

Mr. Kushner, a senior adviser to Mr. Trump, and Ms. Trump, the president's eldest daughter, intervened to strike language about the climate deal from an earlier draft of the executive order, according to these people.

The executive order, which targets Mr. Obama's broad climate agenda, now includes no mention of the climate deal, which nearly 200 nations struck in Paris in 2015, in large part due to a strong push by the Mr. Obama's administration.

One White House official said both Mr. Kushner and Ms. Trump have been considered a moderating influence on the White House's position on climate change and environmental issues. The move is the latest sign of influence Mr. Trump's daughter and Mr. Kushner have in a White House that has seen internal divisions on a variety of issues, including foreign policy.

On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump promised to cancel the climate deal and said it hurt U.S. companies. He has said once since the election that he would be open to remaining a part of the accord, though his top advisers have since maintained that Mr. Trump doesn't take seriously the issue of climate change.

Ms. Trump, in particular, has said that she wants to focus on addressing climate change during her father's administration, a goal that led to a meeting in December between Mr. Trump and former Vice President Al Gore, an influential climate activist. After the meeting, Mr. Gore described the meeting with Mr. Trump as a "sincere search for areas of common ground."

The U.S. commitment to the Paris deal falls under the State Department's jurisdiction. White House spokesman Sean Spicer on Thursday declined to comment on whether Mr. Trump plans to follow through on his campaign promise to withdraw from the deal, saying instead that is a conversation Mr. Trump is having with Secretary of State Rex Tillerson.

"I think I will leave that to Secretary Tillerson," Mr. Spicer said.

As CEO of Exxon Mobil Corp., Mr. Tillerson backed the Paris deal, and he broadly reiterated his support in his confirmation hearing, saying he thinks the U.S. is better served by staying in the accord rather than withdrawing. He emphasized, though, that any final decision would be made by Mr. Trump.

A request for comment to the State Department wasn't immediately returned.

The executive order targeting Mr. Obama's climate agenda, framed in terms of promoting energy independence and domestic energy development, is expected to call for the repeal of Obama administration rules cutting carbon emissions from power plants. The order is also expected to target Obama-era rules on emissions of methane from oil and natural gas wells on federal lands, and to seek to reverse a temporary ban on coal leasing.

The repeal process will take years and is certain to face lawsuits by states and environmental groups.

On the campaign trail, Mr. Trump mocked climate change and dismissed it as a serious issue that needs a solution. His top aides, including chief of staff Reince Priebus and senior adviser Steve Bannon, have struck similar tones.

Most scientists say that human activity contributes to climate change. Almost every country participates in an annual United Nations conference to address the issue, which produced the Paris climate deal.

The U.S. commitment to that agreement relies mostly on the Environmental Protection Agency's carbon rule, which the Trump administration is expected to seek to roll back. It calls for a 32% cut in power-plant carbon emissions by 2030 based on 2005 emission levels.

"I think Paris is still being discussed, and I think there is pushing from our direction and from the pro-Paris direction," said Myron Ebell, who focuses on energy and the environment at the conservative Competitive Enterprise Institute and was a member of Mr. Trump's transition team on EPA issues. Mr. Ebell, who doesn't agree with the scientific consensus on climate, told reporters in London earlier this year that Mr. Trump would withdraw from the deal.

Mr. Ebell said that repealing the carbon role while remaining in the deal itself would make little sense.

"How can you remain a member of the Paris treaty if your commitment isn't even close to reaching it?" Mr. Ebell said.

The agreement aims to keep average global temperatures from rising more than 2 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels through individualized national limits on greenhouse gas emissions, though the deal doesn't itself achieve that level of emissions cuts. World leaders hope to make more aggressive cuts in the years to come through the national plans to curb greenhouse-gas emissions.

The deal doesn't legally require countries to curb emissions or take other steps on climate change—n the U.S. that would have likely required ratification by the Senate, which Mr. Obama was unlikely to get—ut it does require countries to release their targets and report emissions.

The other directive Mr. Trump is planning to sign soon calls on the EPA to begin the process of repealing a rule bringing more bodies of water under federal jurisdiction, which has long faced opposition from lawmakers representing largely rural states, as well as a host of business and agricultural interest groups.

Both the water rule and EPA's rule cutting carbon emissions from power plants have faced legal rebukes. The Supreme Court took the unusual step in February 2016 of temporarily blocking the carbon rule until all litigation was complete, and a federal court similarly blocked nationwide the water rule in October 2015 until litigation plays out.

Write to Amy Harder at amy.harder@wsj.com and Peter Nicholas at peter.nicholas@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* Trump Considers Sending More Troops to Fight \b ISIS\b0 

* Trump Hits FBI Over ‘ational Security' Leaks to Media

* America's Rowdy Town Halls: More Organic Than Organized

* Bannon Tells CPAC: ‘very Day Is Going to Be a Fight'

* U.S. Talks With Mexico Clouded by Mixed Message

* EPA Chief's Emails Show Energy-Firm Ties

* Sessions Reverses Plan to Cut Use of Private Prisons

* Several Trump Cabinet Picks Were Donors to His Transition Effort

Document WSJO000020170223ed2n00c45
