World
Tillerson Says U.S. Is Ready to Talk to Russia About No-Fly Zones in Syria; Chief U.S. diplomat sounds optimistic note on Moscow in advance of Trump meeting with Putin

By Felicia Schwartz 
928 words
6 July 2017
05:28
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—ecretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. was prepared to hold discussions with Russia on setting up no-fly zones in Syria, describing prospects for cooperation with Moscow in markedly optimistic terms despite tense relations between the two countries.

Mr. Tillerson's comments, in a statement issued late Wednesday, come as he is leaving to meet President Donald Trump at a summit of leaders from the Group of 20 leading nations in Hamburg, Germany, where Mr. Trump and Russia's president Vladimir Putin will meet face-to-face for the first time.

The chief U.S. diplomat said Mr. Trump would tell Mr. Putin that the U.S. was prepared to cooperate with Moscow to end more than six years of civil war in Syria.

"The United States and Russia certainly have unresolved differences on a number of issues, but we have the potential to appropriately coordinate in Syria in order to produce stability and serve our mutual security interests," Mr. Tillerson said in a statement.

The Russian embassy in Washington, D.C., didn't respond to a request for comment.

Offering to discuss no-fly zones is a significant step by the Trump administration toward expanded cooperation with Russia. No-fly zones have long faced opposition from U.S. military officials, who see them as risky and expensive and could potentially drag U.S. forces further into the conflict.

But Mr. Tillerson cited progress in efforts between the U.S. and Russia on avoiding accidents between their militaries in Syria as evidence that they could collaborate further. Russia backs the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

"This cooperation over deconfliction zones process is evidence that our two nations are capable of further progress," he said. "The United States is prepared to explore the possibility of establishing with Russia joint mechanisms for ensuring stability, including no-fly zones, on the ground cease-fire observers, and coordinated delivery of humanitarian assistance."

There are multiple "deconfliction zones" in Syria where U.S. and Russian militaries have been working to avoid mishaps, including one around a base near the Syrian town of Al Tanf close to the Iraqi border. U.S. forces and their allies are operating near the zone.

The U.S. has warned Mr. Assad and his forces to steer clear of the area and has alerted the Russian government that it seeks to avoid mishaps but will take defensive action as needed, and American forces have taken several actions against allies of the Syrian government.

The U.S. and Russia have been meeting secretly over the past several months to set up a "de-escalation zone" in southwest Syria, where Moscow and Washington would agree to keep their proxies away from each other. If that effort is successful, officials said that the U.S. would look to set up other such zones around Syria to try to wind down the conflict.

A no-fly zone would involve a commitment both to refrain from flights in a given area and to shoot down planes that enter secure areas. Officials have said no-fly zones would require increased military resources from the U.S.

Mr. Tillerson's olive branch to Russia on Syria comes amid a recent rise in battlefield confrontations between the Syrian regime and American forces battling Islamic State in Syria, which threaten to widen into a direct clash with the regime.

In recent weeks U.S. forces have shot down a Syrian regime warplane as well as two Iranian-made drones viewed as threatening to American forces and Syrian fighters they are working with. The U.S. also has carried out airstrikes on Syrian government forces and their Iranian-backed allies in southern Syria.

Mr. Tillerson said the U.S. is committed to fighting Islamic State in Syria but also wants to see stability in Syria once areas are liberated from the hold of the terrorist group.

"While there are no perfect options for guaranteeing stability, we must explore all possibilities for holding the line against the resurgence of ISIS or other terrorist groups," Mr. Tillerson said. "The United States believes Russia, as a guarantor of the Assad regime and an early entrant into the Syrian conflict, has a responsibility to ensure that the needs of the Syrian people are met and that no faction in Syria illegitimately retakes or occupies areas liberated from ISIS' or other terrorist groups' control."

Mr. Trump's scheduled meeting Friday with Mr. Putin has drawn international interest, given U.S. findings of Russian interference in the 2016 election on Mr. Trump's behalf and the president's longstanding reluctance to criticize Russia or Mr. Putin.

Speaking to reporters at Joint Base Andrews in Maryland on Wednesday before leaving to join Mr. Trump in Germany, Mr. Tillerson said the Trump administration hoped the meeting would be the start of broader cooperation between Moscow and Washington.

"We're at the very beginning...at this point it's difficult to say exactly what Russia's intentions are in this relationship," he said. "That's the most important part of this meeting, is to have a good exchange between President Trump and President Putin over what they both see as the nature of this relationship between our two countries."

Gordon Lubold contributed to this article.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170706ed76000gp
