World
Foreign  ISIS  Fighters Increasingly Isolated in Mosul Battle; Local militants are fleeing as the extremist group loses ground in its last major Iraqi stronghold

By Tamer El-Ghobashy and Ali A. Nabhan 
1,198 words
16 March 2017
16:08
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—slamic State fighters from outside Iraq are increasingly being abandoned by local militants as the group loses ground in Mosul, leaving a hardened core of extremists dominated by foreigners that is girding for a fight to the finish.

Teams of up to 10 fighters composed mainly of foreigners control individual streets in the group's last major Iraqi stronghold, using rooftops as sniper positions and outfitting vehicles with explosives, residents said. The fighters are also building tunnels inside private homes and using residents as human shields, Iraqi and American commanders say.

Unlike militants from Mosul, many foreign fighters and Iraqis from other parts of the country are unable to quit and blend in with civilians who are fleeing the city by the thousands. And with Mosul basically surrounded by Iraqi forces, foreigners can't easily escape into the desert region bordering Syria, either.

"This is their last stand," said Lt. Gen. Abdelghani al-Assadi, the commander of Iraq's elite U.S.-trained counterterrorism forces. "99% of them came to die."

In some cases, the foreign fighters have executed Iraqi militants as Islamic State suffers setbacks and tensions rise, said Col. John Dorrian, a spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition fighting the group in Iraq and Syria. "It works very well for us because it saves our partner force the trouble of fighting them," he said.

Between 1,500 and 2,000 Islamic State fighters remain in western Mosul, with 70% to 90% of them hailing from outside Iraq—rimarily Saudi Arabia, Yemen, China, Tajikistan and Russia, including the Chechnya region—op officers in the counterterrorism forces estimate.

Many of the foreigners commanded militant units in eastern Mosul, but managed to flee across the Tigris River when that part of the city was recaptured by government forces in late January. Now the militants have nowhere to go, and the battle for western Mosul has become particularly destructive.

The limited ability to shuttle foreign militants between Iraq and Syria will deprive Islamic State of its fiercest fighters when the group faces a life or death battle for the Syrian city of Raqqa, de facto capital of its self-declared caliphate, the officers said. Syrian rebels, the Assad regime and Kurdish-led militias are fighting for position around Raqqa, as debates over strategy in Washington threaten to delay an offensive there until at least next month.

American commanders assisting the Iraqi military said the fight in western Mosul has highlighted an Islamic State command structure that tilts heavily toward foreigners and shows that Islamic State's remaining influence in Iraq is waning.

Over the past several months, the gap between Iraqi and foreign militants has grown, with the foreigners enjoying better pay and treatment and getting better weapons, said Maj. Gen. Joseph Martin, the commander of American ground forces in Iraq.

"They are subjugating the population and their native Iraqi fighters as well," he said.

Iraq's military said it has won back three-fourths of western Mosul since launching a ground offensive there on Feb. 19—ains that have come partly because frustrated Iraqi fighters are abandoning the battle.

Iraqi authorities are carefully inspecting people escaping the city and arresting suspected militants among them, which could guard against those militants returning to the insurgency. Many of the Iraqis arrested are believed to be Mosul natives who were forced to fight alongside Islamic State, according to Iraqi military commanders. Iraqi fighters who have remained are often from other parts of the country and cannot easily escape undetected.

Those gains have come at a high cost to civilians in western Mosul's older, more densely populated neighborhoods. Airwars, an independent research group monitoring civilian casualties in Iraq and Syria, estimated between 250 to 370 civilians were killed in the first week of March, due partly to Iraqi and coalition airstrikes and artillery. The United Nations has also reported high civilian casualty rates, citing Islamic State's indiscriminate shelling as a major contributor.

Residents of western Mosul are often warier of Iraqi security forces, having lived under militant influence since 2004, when al Qaeda, a predecessor to Islamic State in Iraq, planted roots in that part of the city.

Lt. Gen. Abdelwahab al-Saaidi, an Iraqi counterterrorism commander, said residents in western Mosul have been stingy on sharing information on militant positions.

Since Islamic State seized the city in June 2014, the group has used the spoils of Mosul to lure foreigners.

Fighters and administrators from Europe and the Persian Gulf moved into the city's well-heeled districts that were home to spacious villas abandoned by doctors and professors, residents said. Soon Russian, French and Dutch could be heard alongside Arabic in the public markets dotting the tony districts along the Tigris's eastern bank, residents of eastern Mosul said. With such preferential treatment and no clear route for escape, they were trusted not to defect.

"Locals could escape the fight and disappear with the help of relatives," said a senior Iraqi field officer. "But the foreign fighters stayed because they have no other place to go."

Those who remain have worked to fortify the city's defenses.

Engineers have outfitted store-bought drones with explosives, and they have also modified and repaired weapons, said the senior Iraqi officer.

Hisham al-Hashimi, a terrorism researcher who has advised the Iraqi government, said Chinese fighters with mining backgrounds have been valuable to Islamic State for their experience in digging tunnels that militants use to move discreetly and ambush Iraqi troops.

Sommoud, a neighborhood along a thoroughfare in western Mosul called Baghdad Road, bears scars of fierce battles being led by foreigners.

Residents and Iraqi commanders said Islamic State had in late February sent extra fortification to Sommoud as a first line of defense against advancing Iraqi troops.

Ten militants appeared on a residential street, commanded by a Saudi Arabian fighter who told locals to call him Abu Layla. He had two deputies, residents said, a Sudanese and a Yemeni easily identified by their accents.

The three men ordered Iraqi fighters under their command, along with young men who lived on the street, to use sledgehammers to make holes in the walls between houses so they could move between them undetected by Iraqi and coalition forces, residents said.

"The Saudi fighter gave the orders to the Iraqi fighters," said Tariq Humoud, a 60-year-old resident on the block.

Abu Layla also ordered that all cars without working batteries on the street be torched as they couldn't be used as car bombs, Mr. Humoud said.

The street had been the site of a late February battle led by Abu Layla's unit, residents said. After six days, their homes were in ruins.

"They were criminals," said resident Faris Muhammad, 49. "They destroyed lives and homes for the sake of destruction. The Saudi in particular terrorized us."

Ben Kesling in Washington contributed to this article.

Write to Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170316ed3g0060q
