The Public Editor
Public Editor
Friday Mailbag: Pink Slip in Washington, Sweepstakes in the Catskills

By LIZ SPAYD with EVAN GERSHKOVICH 
1,763 words
17 February 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

The news coming out of Washington this week has been a whirlwind to follow, in keeping with the past month. A top White House official was out, a cabinet nominee got the boot, reports surfaced that Trump campaign aides were in regular contact with Russian intelligence officials throughout the race, and President Trump took a national security briefing in the open at Mar-a-Lago, to name a few of this week’ stories.

 Journalists have been left struggling to keep up, as a Times article illustrated on Thursday. Still, some readers complain that The Times is overcovering the capital.

Of course it’ important and newsworthy when we have a new president and change of administration, but lately it seems Trump news absolutely dominates the first section and the front page. Surely there are other important stories happening in the world, but they seem to be taking a back seat to the overwhelming proportion of Trump stories, relegating them to a seemingly lesser status no matter how important they are.

Chas. Schwartz

I know it is still early days, but I’ struggling to get a sense of perspective in the Times’ coverage of the Trump administration. What I see now feels like: “ere is the latest bad thing Trump has done.”ut some nuance would be useful to more easily understand what was bad, really bad or even worse. Maybe if —r when —e’ done something good too, I wonder how that might be covered? I realize that The Times has become the de facto opposing voice after the recent election, but it often feels I’ being screamed at day after day.

Greg Neilson, Sydney, Australia

Yet, as one reader pointed out on Twitter, not only is there an appetite for such news —he ten most-read stories on the Times site Wednesday afternoon were all Washington related —he stories are some of the most significant of the day.

The public editor’ take: A Trump overdose is a potential hazard to all of us, but this week offered some pretty exceptional journalism. Cheers to the Washington scribes.

Sticking with the president, several readers wrote in in a continued effort to push The Times to qualify Trump’ statements.

Today’ Times has one particularly bad headline: “rump Vows Quick Action to Stop Terrorism After Setback in Court.”he Times usually gets headlines right. And as a former reporter and editor I’ well aware of headline constraints. But “top Terrorism” How about something a little more accurate like “rump Vows Quick Action After Court Setback on Immigration Ban”r, if “an”s too strong a word for your headline writers, how about just leaving that word off (“rump Vows Quick Action After Court Setback on Immigration” or like “rump Vows Quick Action After Court Setback on Executive Order.”

Joan Abramson, San Francisco

Another reader complained about the language used to summarize the same article, on new border security measures being pursued by Trump.

A bullet point on the home page that described the article said: “resident Trump promised to introduce new measures by next week to prevent terrorists entering the United States.”The first time I noticed this description of Trump’ order was the first description of the appeals court decision.) But many of us (including national security experts who wrote briefs supporting the stay of the order) would argue that Trump’ measures make us LESS safe, by supporting the ISIS recruitment claim that there is a war between Islam and the West. Therefore, it is irresponsible to describe the order using Trump’ claim, as one “o prevent terrorists from entering”hen it is preventing peaceful people from entering and may actually have the effect of turning people into terrorists. Wouldn’ it be more accurate to say “hat Trump claims are designed to prevent terrorists…”

Lynn Caporale, Manhattan

The public editor’ take: The life of a headline writer is not easy. In this case, I think these readers make a good point. It’ one thing for Trump to assert that his initiatives will stop terrorism, but these headlines could easily be seen as The Times thinking so too. I spoke to Jill Taylor, the head of the copy desks, about this issue, and she agreed that both the headline and the bullet summary lacked the necessary clarification of Trump’ intent. Though the tight space makes doing so difficult, she said, it is necessary nonetheless.

Several readers took issue with the way one of Trump’ senior advisers, Stephen Miller, was described in a profile —amely, that the story noted his religion.

Is it a policy of The New York Times to refer to an individual as Jewish, even if the individual’ Jewish ancestry or Judaism, per se, is without context in the story? This appears to be the case in the piece by Glenn Thrush and Jennifer Steinhauer profiling Stephen Miller. We are told that “t Duke, Mr. Miller, who is Jewish, cut a similarly confrontational swath, and was briefly friendly with Richard Spencer, who later became a prominent white supremacist, when both were members of the university’ Young Conservatives chapter.”

Hank Green

Thrush, the lead reporter for the piece, took the time to reply to Green. “o you think it would be appropriate NOT to reference his religion considering Mr. Miller’ relationship with Mr. Spencer, a known white supremacist?”hrush wrote. “hy deny a reader the important context about Mr. Miller?”

The public editor’ take: The Times stylebook states that “he religion of a person in the news should be mentioned only when it is pertinent and its pertinence is clear to the reader.”nfortunately, that’ a bit vague. What’ clear to some readers won’ be to others. In this case, I’ with Thrush. As a reader, I found it interesting and informative that Stephens, a Jew, was at one time friendly with a man who emerged later as a white supremacist.

A Times reporter who covered Hillary Clinton’ campaign, Amy Chozick, is taking leave to write a book about her experience covering Clinton for eight years, on and off. One reader was left wondering about how such an arrangement would work.

How do Times reporters who have book deals (and, presumably, their editors) decide what to tell the readers in real time and what to “ave for the book” Given that the information gathered and the access provided emanate from Times employment, how is that slippery slope negotiated?

Gene Krzyzynski, Tonawanda, N.Y.

While we can’ speak to anyone’ specific book contract, we asked Phil Corbett, the associate managing editor for standards, for his take. He told us that he has discussed this question with other reporters in the past and it has generally been a nonissue. If a reporter working on a book comes across bombshell news, Corbett said, The Times wants it and the reporter is generally eager to write it for the paper. For one thing, he added, these days reporters know that “aving it for the book”ay well mean they’l get scooped by some competitor.

Leaving politics and turning to real estate for this mailbag’ grand finale: One reader took issue with a column about a couple that put their Catskills vacation home up for auction by way of an essay contest.

I’ concerned by the lack of some basic facts in this article —he lack of which gives the impression that this is a contest rather than a scam. The rules of the contest allow Mr. Bares and Ms. Lavorgna to keep $49 (roughly one third) of the $149 entry fee if they do not receive 5,500 entries. This means that if 5,499 people enter the contest, the owners have the right to cancel the contest, award no prize (thereby keeping the house), and still keep $269,451 (which is roughly the assessed value of the property). They are then free to run the contest again, if they so choose. How is this anything but a scam, and why wouldn’ The New York Times report on it as such, rather than offering essentially free advertising to the scammers? (The article included a link to the promotional piece that markets the contest.) I understand that the article included some negative opinions about these contests in general (though mostly from real estate agents who would, of course, take a dim view of anything that cuts into their business), and yet the article failed to include these basic facts.

Jacqueline Davis, Needham, Mass.

We asked Vivian Toy, the real estate editor, for her view.

The reporter, Ronda Kaysen, exhibits a healthy amount of skepticism in the piece. She points out that the owners were previously unable to sell the house and are holding this essay contest as a way to try to get the amount they were unable to get on the open market. In addition to quoting a broker who doesn’ believe the house is worth what the owners hope to get for it, Ronda also quotes an appraiser who calls the contest “ gimmick.”he rules of the contest are plainly stated, including the full disclosure that the owners will keep $49 of the $149 entry fee if they do not receive 5,500 entries. While the reader may see this as proof that they plan to keep a substantial amount of money after canceling the contest, couldn’ the disclosed plan to keep $49 for administrative fees be a hedge against the possibility that they only receive a few hundred entries? You may question why anyone would want to enter such a contest, but it could hardly be called a scam if the administrative fee is fully disclosed. We’e heard about these types of essay-writing contests for properties around the country before, I think the value in telling the story was the chance to explain how these contests do (and don’) work.

For those hoping to scribble their way to that Catskills home, we wish you luck.

Each Friday, Evan Gershkovich, in the office of public editor Liz Spayd, surfaces some of the more thoughtful and provocative feedback that comes in —ome of which is edited for clarity and length. To be featured here, email the public editor at public@nytimes.com. Follow the public editor on Twitter@spaydl.

Tim Lahan 

Document NYTFEED020170217ed2h0030o
