Opinion
A New Role for America's No. 1 Ally; Australia has fought alongside us since World War I. What now in the Trump era?

By Bill Lane 
558 words
24 March 2017
00:03
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

On July 4, 1918, Pvt. Thaddeus Sylvester Lewandowski of Chicago was wounded near the village of Le Hamel, France. By World War I standards, it was a modest affair. In 93 minutes, at a cost of 1,400 men killed and wounded, the allies captured the town, killed 2,000 German soldiers, and took another 1,600 prisoner.

The Battle of Hamel had two lasting legacies. The allies, led by Australia's Gen. John Monash, conducted a coordinated, combined-arms operation that included smoke and gas diversions, creeping artillery, robust assaults by Mark V tanks and infantry, plus the first ever air drops to resupply infantry. The successful model would later be applied to bigger battles that eventually breached the Hindenburg Line and won the war.

Hamel also set in motion a remarkable military alliance. Ten green Illini companies had been attached to the British Expeditionary Force to gain experience. Four joined the battle, making it the first time Americans and Australians fought side by side. It was also the first time Americans fought under foreign command.

If one measures U.S. allies by dependability, Australia is No. 1. Americans and Australians have fought together in every major conflict of the past century: World War I, the Russian Civil War, World War II, the Cold War, Korea, Vietnam, the Gulf War, Afghanistan and Iraq. We are both engaged in the fight against al Qaeda and ISIS. No other U.S. ally can match that record.

World War I was also the start of America's wider role as a defender of democracy. Since the end of the World War II, the president has often been referred to as the leader of the Free World.

That appears to be changing. President Trump reportedly had harsh words for Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull during their first official conversation. Counterproductive dust-ups followed with Mexico, Britain and Germany.

To be fair, we were warned. In his recent address to Congress, Mr. Trump declared: "My job is not to represent the world. My job is to represent the United States of America." That's a stark contrast with President Kennedy's proclamation: "Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, to assure the survival and the success of liberty."

Surely there's a middle ground. Time will tell if Mr. Trump will continue pushing toward protectionism and isolationism, or whether he will pivot toward open markets and engagement.

Nearly a century ago, Australia showed the world how to win World War I and proved it stood ready to be a reliable ally to America. My grandfather, Pvt. Lewandowski, was part of that history. My hope is that during the next four years Australia will keep steady, demonstrating the importance of multilateral cooperation, mutual defense and international trade. By doing so it may show our new president that interdependence, not just independence, makes Americans safe, strong and prosperous.

If it does, Australia may earn the title leader of the Free World.

Mr. Lane is a retired director of global government affairs at Caterpillar Inc.

Document WSJO000020170323ed3n009vm
