The Conversation
Opinion
#OscarsSoOrange

By GAIL COLLINS and FRANK BRUNI 
1,643 words
21 February 2017
09:21
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Gail Collins: Frank, it’ so exciting to take a break from Donald Trump and converse about —ovies! Although I truly believe that almost everything about the Academy Awards this year will be political.

Frank Bruni: That is a bit of unimpeachable soothsaying, Gail. I’ suggest that the drinking game for this year’ Oscars is a quaff every time there’ a reference, explicit or oblique, to our 45th president, but I fear I’ be blamed —ightly —or a national cirrhosis epidemic.

Gail: Well, I definitely blame/credit our president with the fact that I’e seen all nine best picture nominees. Once they went above five, I gave up the challenge. But right now I’l do anything to divert my mind from the White House.

Frank: Maybe in this conversation we should analyze every movie through the lens of Trump, because it seems to me right now that all of American life is discussed through the lens of Trump. He’ an all-consuming lens. Like some Hubble telescope of commanders in chief.

Gail: That’ quite the image. I’ now imagining the lovers in “a La Land”oing to Griffith Observatory to look through —onald Trump? Euew. Although if “a La Land”s named best picture, it’l probably be because the president made everyone desperate for cheer.

I did think it was a good movie, despite the part about Ryan Gosling showing the black guys how to really play jazz. Did you have an artistic/political favorite?

Frank: “oonlight”ll the way. I agree with you on “a La Land”— good movie and a definite agent of cheer —ut worthy of the boatload of Oscars that everyone’ predicting for it? No.

“oonlight,”hough, is something of a miracle: Its protagonist is inarticulate —e barely has any dialogue —ut the movie couldn’ be more articulate. Or more engrossing.

Gail: You’e right. “oonlight”s great. “a La Land”s entertaining.

Frank: By being so quiet and so deliberate, “oonlight”nvests the most intimate moments — single conversation, a single touch —ith the sweep and resonance that they can and do actually have in a life.

And I think it’ the perfect companion piece for this political moment. Our campaigns and debates reduce race to an abstraction, but “oonlight,”ithout ever explicitly identifying race as one of its concerns, gives us a view of disadvantaged, troubled black lives that’ intensely relatable and mostly (though not entirely) free of cliché It has an authority and a dignity that bowled me over.

Gail: I’e seen a lot of fine movies about poverty and race, but I don’ think I’e ever seen one that kept its audience without violence or even, for the most part, sex. Just knocked me out.

Frank: Take me through the best picture nominees and tell me which is a Trump movie, which a Hillary Clinton movie, which a Bernie Sanders movie, and which a Ted Cruz movie. Let’ reunite the whole 2016 gang!

Gail: “idden Figures”s definitely the Hillary movie. It’ not fancy, but it wins you over with the determination of its heroines. Plus there are some scenes about getting to the restroom I know she’ appreciate.

In theory “ences”hould be the Bernie Sanders movie, since everybody in it keeps making the same long speeches. Am I being too mean? To Bernie, that is.

Frank: I want to say that “acksaw Ridge”s a Trump movie, in that it’ so damned blunt and bullying, and there’ more than a whiff of Trump in its director, Mel Gibson, whom Hollywood seems to have forgiven utterly. (The only thing Hollywood does better than sermonize and browbeat is forgive.)

But it’ about someone who’ the opposite of a bully: a pacifist in a war zone. Sort of like Jeb Bush in the 2016 campaign.

Gail: “ell or High Water”s about brothers who are about to lose the family ranch. So you can weave in some Sanders populism. The Texas Ranger is played by Beloved Actor Jeff Bridges, who will be our stand-in for Joe Biden. Hardly anybody remembers this movie is up, so that’l give us a Martin O’alley.

Frank: “rrival”s a Kellyanne Conway movie, in that cutting through the fog of her spin is precisely like trying to communicate with an alien.

Gail: I liked “anchester by the Sea,”ut since it’ the most depressing movie in memory, I’ have to say that its political parallel is election night.

Unless you’e got a yen to discuss “ion,”et’ move on to the acting categories. Is there anybody you’e really dying to see win? Who’ give the craziest acceptance speech?

Frank: If Meryl Streep somehow won best actress, which she won’, we’ get something juicy and political, because she’ deep into her juicy and political phase now, though I suspect she’ leave football out of it this time around.

I’ love to see a win by Isabelle Huppert for “lle,” movie that I found mesmerizing in part because its feminist politics, for lack of a better phrase, were so impossible to parse. I’l tell you this: If you made that exact same script with that exact same director but set it in San Francisco and put Sharon Stone in the lead, women would be picketing it. You buy yourself a lot of wiggle room with a French accent, subtitles, a Parisian locale, the Seine, a few baguettes and Huppert.

Gail: Too bad we’e not still doing the political comparisons, since “lle”alls to mind the adjectives “ark and twisted.”

I’ rooting for Mahershala Ali to win best supporting actor for “oonlight.”

Frank: I find the supporting categories more exciting this year than the lead ones, which have nominees I seriously question: Ryan Gosling in “a La Land,”uth Negga in “oving,”treep in “lorence Foster Jenkins.”treep is the best of those three, but she’ had so many nominations at this point that when she’ anything short of transcendent, the nod seems obligatory, compulsory, predictable —ike a Trump brag about his Electoral College haul whenever he utters more than 10 sentences in public.

Gail: Sometimes you have supporting nominees who actually seemed to be the lead in the movie —hinking here of Dev Patel, the star of “ion,”o matter what the list-makers say. He can be our stand-in for Mike Pence, who I suspect is going to wind up as the real chief executive while Trump just …oars.

And then there are the ones who make brief, spectacular appearances, like Michelle Williams in “anchester.”ut Ali was very low-key as the fatherly drug dealer. And he wasn’ onscreen long, yet he made a huge impact —eally set the tone for the whole film.

Frank: The supporting actress category marks the first time three of the five nominees in an acting category are black. It also happens to be, in my view, the strongest field of the four acting categories.

In any other year, Williams —pectacular indeed —ould win. But this year Naomie Harris (“oonlight” and Viola Davis (“ences” are up, too, and they’e spectacular.

Gail: All the actors in “ences”ere top-notch, but I sort of lost track of their quality in the fog of all that talk.

Frank: Yeah, “ences”as so clearly a stage production in cinematic drag, talky and inert in a way that rarely works onscreen. But there’ still no denying the artistry of Davis’ work in it or the fact that she’ due an Oscar. The trophy will go to her.

Are there categories beyond the acting ones that you find interesting, especially at this fraught juncture in our country’ existence?

Gail: Yes, I’ dying to see who’l pick up the award for best foreign film, if “he Salesman”rom Iran wins. The director, as you know, was barred from the country during the Trump immigration crackdown.

The real drama is going to be in those acceptance speeches. How many of the honorees will take the time to thank their co-stars and agents before going directly to the horrificness of Donald Trump?

Frank: That depends, really, on how much more horrificness Trump will yet commit. There’ —hat? — week until the little gold men are doled out. That’ plenty of time for our big gold man to ban Hindus, levy special tariffs on Delta (poor, scapegoated Delta), fire two more senior aides and divulge his top-secret strategy for fighting ISIS (um, whatever happened to that?) over s’ores on the beach in front of Mar-a-Loco. Sorry, Mar-a-Lago.

Gail: Well, it should be …n evening. And you know the president will be watching every minute.

Frank: I await the morning-after tweets. And for a reality check, may I say that I never imagined a day when I’ be expecting angry post-Oscar tweets from the president of the United States? Someday this will be a movie. I cannot wait, because it will mean that we’e finally past this fearful present.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

Gail Collins and Frank Bruni are Op-Ed columnists.

Oscar statuettes awaiting their coating of gold at Epner Technology in Brooklyn. | Seth Wenig/Associated Press | Mahershala Ali, left, and Alex Hibbert in a scene from “oonlight.” David Bornfriend/A24, via Associated Press | Mel Gibson, center, and actor Vince Vaughn on the set of the film “acksaw Ridge.” Summit, via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170221ed2l0018r
