U.S. News: Ex- ISIS  Recruit Aids Prosecutors --- Work includes intervention with teen in effort to head off potential terrorism

By Nicole Hong 
1,133 words
8 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn believe they have found a special weapon in their fight against terrorism: a young man named Mo.

Mo, a U.S. citizen whose full name is under seal, left New York City in the summer of 2014 to join Islamic State in Syria. Mo, now 28 years old, quickly became disillusioned, he says now. Four months in, he sent an email to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. "Please help me get home," he wrote, according to court documents. "I'm fed up with this evil."

While the FBI was still verifying the email, a civilian smuggler helped Mo escape and reach a U.S. State Department outpost in Turkey.

Authorities in November 2014 deported Mo back to Brooklyn, where he pleaded guilty to two terrorism charges. He told the FBI that he acted as a building guard for Islamic State and taught other recruits how to use computer software.

Since then, Mo's work with the U.S. government has included an unusual form of cooperation: conducting an intervention with a 15-year-old boy from Brooklyn who was posting tweets that appeared to support violence and Islamic State, also known as ISIS. The intervention so far has successfully dissuaded the teenager from joining the terrorist group.

Mo, whose offenses carry a maximum sentence of 25 years in prison, will likely be sentenced by a federal judge this summer.

The unorthodox use of Mo became one catalyst for a new counterterrorism initiative by the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office. The effort is aimed at getting law enforcement to intervene earlier with terrorism suspects, before they take substantial steps toward violence or traveling overseas. It also hopes to connect suspects with mental-health counselors, mentors and defectors like Mo.

The initiative is the brainchild of Seth DuCharme, a former marshal who leads the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office's national-security and cybercrime unit. As the volume of terrorist-related threats online has grown, Mr. DuCharme said law enforcement needs a new approach for suspects who post worrisome statements on social media but don't yet warrant criminal prosecution.

Brooklyn's effort is targeted at suspects who fall into a gray area, such as a juvenile "who can potentially be redirected and moved away from violence," Mr. DuCharme said.

Islamic State's flashy propaganda videos have been particularly appealing to young people who are loners or have mental-health issues, prosecutors say. Other U.S. jurisdictions have considered so-called "deradicalization" programs, a recognition that some suspects are young enough to turn their lives around without decades in prison.

Brooklyn's work with Mo is unique, as prosecutors in other districts say they have struggled to find Islamic State defectors who can be trusted or are willing to work with the government.

Prosecutors in the Eastern District of New York, which includes Brooklyn, have been among the most active in bringing terrorism cases, publicly charging 16 Islamic State sympathizers since 2014, according to researchers.

"We are not deferring prosecution of terrorists. That notion would be absurd," said Brooklyn U.S. Attorney Robert Capers. "Where prosecution . . . is appropriate, our office has a robust record for holding terrorists accountable."

Under the new initiative, Brooklyn federal prosecutors will also use more discretion before charging someone with providing "material support" to terrorists, a broad violation that carries a maximum of 20 years in prison. Prosecutors may try to arrest some individuals on a lesser charge without the terrorism stigma, such as wire fraud.

For suspects already in custody, prosecutors will give more consideration to a shorter prison sentence in exchange for a longer period of supervised release that includes counseling or treatment.

Prosecutors are proceeding cautiously, saying they expect no more than a handful of suspects to be part of the effort in the first year.

The effort represents a gamble for the Brooklyn U.S. attorney's office and other agencies involved, including the FBI. A failed early intervention where a suspect ends up committing a terrorist attack would likely mean the end of the project, officials say. Meanwhile, there are no clear metrics for measuring its success.

"We're taking an incredible amount of risk because we're talking about providing a resource that isn't necessarily what the FBI typically does," one law-enforcement official said.

Skeptics of Brooklyn's initiative say they are uncomfortable giving terrorism suspects the chance to change their behavior before an arrest. Such opportunities aren't typically afforded to gang members, corrupt politicians or other types of criminals, say current and former officials.

A major hurdle for Brooklyn is identifying which suspects are amenable to an early intervention. According to former prosecutors, intervening before an arrest could tip a terror suspect off to government surveillance and encourage the suspect to move communications to encrypted apps.

Ironically, the government's initial miscalculation with Mo shows what can go wrong with an early intervention.

FBI agents first confronted Mo at his home in Brooklyn in June 2014, after his activity on Twitter aroused suspicion.

At the time, Mo, who grew up Muslim in Brooklyn, had dropped out of Columbia University and worked as a cabdriver to pay off his student loans. In an interview, Mo said he had become increasingly religious and sought answers about Islam online, which led him to terrorist recruiters posing as credible scholars. "I ended up in a bubble because I wasn't going to school," he said.

During the FBI's visit, Mo told the agents he supported groups fighting the Syrian government but lacked the resources to get there, according to the court documents. The agents left, thinking Mo wasn't a threat.

One week later, Mo boarded a flight to Istanbul. He said the FBI visit made him realize if he wanted to live under Shariah law, he had to act quickly.

When asked whether he knew Islamic State was a terrorist group, Mo said he was skeptical. "What makes one group a terrorist group and another one not?" he said he wondered at the time.

After reaching Istanbul and crossing the border to Syria, Mo said he lived with the other recruits without much food, constantly fearing for his life and moving from house to house. He heard Islamic State members justify suicide vests and other violent acts that he knew didn't comport with "the type of Islam I grew up with."

During several interviews, Mo spoke frequently in philosophical terms, saying he was interested in the question of when "religiosity crosses over into radicalism." The government declined to comment on Mo's conditions of confinement.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170308ed380001o
