World News:  ISIS  Claim Clouds Probe in Deadly Fire --- Extremist group says it is behind Manila rampage, but police declare no terror link

By Ben Otto and James Hookway 
650 words
3 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA -- Islamic State claimed responsibility for a rampage at a Manila casino early Friday that left at least 36 people dead, renewing terrorism concerns about an incident the Philippines government said was a botched one-man robbery attempt.

The statement echoed others in which Islamic State says it was behind attacks in which there was no operational link to the group.

The Philippines said it hasn't found any link to terrorism. Government spokesman Ernesto Abella described the suspect, who police said was a tall, fair-complexioned foreigner, as emotionally disturbed. Police have yet to identify him.

National police chief Gen. Ronald Dela Rosa said the suspect's plan appeared to be to rob the Resorts World casino before setting parts of the building on fire to distract law enforcers as he made his escape.

By the end of the night, responders had found the bodies of at least 36 suffocation victims in and around the casino hall, many of whom had barricaded themselves into bathrooms to escape the gunman. The attacker had killed himself in a hotel room, Gen. Dela Rosa said.

The incident at Resorts World, the largest casino complex in the country, began around midnight when the man entered the building from a second-floor car park carrying a semiautomatic rifle. Inside the casino, he fired into the air and set fire to gaming tables before ransacking a storage room and stuffing $2.3 million in gambling chips into a backpack, Gen. Dela Rosa said.

As smoke began to billow from the complex, the man tried to make his way out but was blocked by police. Resorts World's security team managed to shoot and wound him, forcing him back inside, where he holed up in a fifth-floor room, said the casino's chief operating officer, Stephen Reilly.

Gen. Dela Rosa said this was where the gunman took his own life.

"Apparently he lay on the bed and covered the blanket in gasoline and then set himself on fire," the national police chief said. The suspect then shot himself. "He was burned beyond recognition," he said.

That the suspect didn't shoot anyone was an indication that the incident was a failed robbery rather than terrorist attack, the police chief and other officials said. Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte didn't comment publicly on the incident Friday.

Nonetheless, suspicions remain that the attack and fire were the handiwork of terrorists. As the incident was unfolding, U.S. President Donald Trump, in opening remarks in the nationally televised declaration of his withdrawal from the Paris climate accord, referred to the incident as a terrorist attack.

The Philippines is battling Islamic State-linked militants in the southern city of Marawi, where the fighters invaded more than a week ago to prevent the arrest of a terror suspect.

Citizens from Saudi Arabia, Yemen and other countries have died in the conflict, stirring concern that, as Islamic State loses territory in Syria and Iraq, growing numbers of foreign militants are joining the long-running Muslim separatist insurgency in the southern part of the predominantly Roman Catholic Philippines.

Scores of people have died in the conflict, including civilians and 10 Philippine troops who were killed in a friendly fire incident on Wednesday.

Islamic State said its fighters were responsible for the loss of life at the Resorts World casino in a brief Arabic statement posted on Islamic State's Amaq media arm. It used the plural form of the term, contradicting Philippine authorities' insistence that there was just one attacker.

In a subsequent statement, the terror group identified a single participant with the nom de guerre Abu al-Khayr al-Arkabili, SITE Intelligence Group reported.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170603ed630001q
