Politics
How a Republican Bill Led to Countries Named in Donald Trump's Immigration Order; The legislation was aimed at pressuring European allies to share more terror-related intelligence

By Joe Palazzolo 
884 words
6 February 2017
00:58
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

White House officials had an answer ready when reporters asked how President Donald Trump chose the seven countries whose citizens he temporarily banned from entering the U.S.: He took his cues from the Obama administration.

President Trump's chief of staff, Reince Priebus, said in a recent appearance on NBC's "Meet the Press" that the places named in Mr. Trump's executive order on immigration and refugees were "identified by the Obama administration as the seven most dangerous countries in the world in regard to harboring terrorists and affirmed by Congress."

Sean Spicer, Mr. Trump's press secretary, repeated the claim during a news conference last Tuesday.

But most of the countries were first identified in legislation introduced by Republicans. The bill, which later passed Congress with bipartisan support, was aimed not at curbing immigration, but at pressuring European allies to share more terror-related intelligence.

The bill was signed by President Barack Obama in 2015. His Department of Homeland Security later added three more countries to the list, using criteria established by the new law.

A spokesman for the Trump White House said Mr. Obama "designated four of the countries when he signed the law and the other three" later on.

The story of how the seven majority-Muslim countries came to be in Mr. Trump's order begins with a 2014 bill introduced by then-Rep. Candice Miller, a Michigan Republican who retired from Congress this year.

The bill sought to tighten the security of a federal program that allows citizens of the U.K., France and three dozen other nations to travel to the U.S. without a visa.

Reports of young Europeans streaming onto battlefields in Iraq and Syria to fight for ISIS or other terrorist organizations alarmed lawmakers, who worried returning fighters could exploit the visa-waiver program to travel undetected to the U.S., according to congressional aides.

Members of the House Homeland Security Committee were concerned countries participating in the visa-waiver program were withholding "vital terrorism data" from the Department of Homeland Security and the U.S. Intelligence community, according to a committee report on the bill.

Ms. Miller's bill forced countries to turn over intelligence about their citizens with suspected terrorist links or face suspension from the program, which allows eligible foreigners to travel to the U.S. after filling out an online questionnaire.

She introduced an amended version of the bill, which became the Visa Waiver Program Improvement and Terrorist Travel Prevention Act, the following year. It included the information-sharing provisions and new restrictions on waivers. Citizens from the 38 countries in the program who had made trips to Iran, Iraq, Sudan or Syria since 2011 would be ineligible to enter the U.S. without a visa.

House Republicans said in a 2015 letter to then-Secretary of State John Kerry that Ms. Miller's legislation included Iran because the State Department had classified the country as a state sponsor of terrorism since 1984.

An official involved in drafting the legislation said Sudan and Syria, designated as state sponsors in 1993 and 1979, respectively, were placed in the visa waiver bill for the same reason.

Federal law restricts U.S. assistance and defense exports to countries determined by the secretary of state "to have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism." The designation is used to pressure governments that support terrorism as a matter of official policy to change their ways.

Ms. Miller, who declined to comment, added Iraq to the bill out of concern about Islamic State, the terrorist group that by 2015 occupied one-third of the country, the official said.

"We didn't want to come up with countries off the top of our heads," the official said.

The November 2015 Paris attacks that killed 130 people gave new urgency to the legislation. Dozens of House members, about a third of them Democrats, signed on as co-sponsors in the days following the attacks, which were planned mostly by citizens of France and Belgium, both members of the visa waiver program.

A stand-alone version of the bill sailed through the House of Representatives by a vote of 407-19. The legislation ultimately passed as part of a spending bill on Dec. 18 and was signed by Mr. Obama the same day.

The new law required the Department of Homeland Security to decide whether travel to any additional countries should disqualify people from obtaining visa waivers. It established broad criteria, including whether travel to a given country "increases the likelihood that the alien is a credible threat to the national security of the United States."

The department added Libya, Somalia and Yemen, all failed or near-failed states, to the list of disqualifying countries last year, bringing the total to seven. The Department of Homeland Security didn't respond to a request for comment.

The law didn't impact the travel of citizens from those seven nations to the U.S. They could still obtain a visa, until Jan. 27 when Mr. Trump signed his order.

Write to Joe Palazzolo at joe.palazzolo@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170205ed25003jt
