World
Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte Pushes to Extend Martial Law; Duterte says he won't be able to subdue threat by  ISIS -aligned militants on Mindanao by coming end of 60-day period

Jake Maxwell Watts 
703 words
18 July 2017
10:02
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MANILA—hilippines President Rodrigo Duterte has asked the country's Congress to extend martial law in the southern island of Mindanao to the end of the year, arguing that the continued suspension of some civil liberties is necessary to contain a threat from Islamic State-linked militants.

The request would see the duration of martial law more than tripled, a sign of the difficulties the Philippines faces in ridding Mindanao of several violent extremist groups.

The country's military is struggling to end a bloody battle in the southern city of Marawi, where Islamic militants who occupied the city eight weeks ago are still in a standoff with government forces. The uprising has been described by government officials as an attempt by armed groups to declare an Islamic caliphate in a small Muslim-majority part of Mindanao.

Mr. Duterte is seeking an extension to martial law because he has come to the conclusion that the fighting in Marawi won't be subdued by the time its term expires this weekend, according to a letter to Congress read to reporters on Tuesday by presidential spokesman Ernesto Abella. Mr. Abella didn't provide an explanation for why such a long extension is required.

Several deadlines set by officials to end the siege have passed. Nearly 550 people have died since a failed attempt to arrest a militant leader triggered the battle. At least 45 of the dead are civilians, some of whom were beheaded by the militants.

Martial law allows the military to search and arrest suspects without the usual need for a warrant. Philippine law allows the president to declare martial law for up to 60 days but requires congressional approval for an extension. It isn't clear whether Mr. Duterte's request for more time would be granted, although the president's allies dominate both houses of Congress.

The government has responded forcefully to the occupation of Marawi, declaring its intention not to negotiate with the militants and sending troops into a pitched battle for the city that included the use of heavy weaponry and airstrikes. An unknown number of civilian hostages are being held by a handful of militants who retain control of small pockets of the city.

Despite the carnage, Mr. Duterte continues to enjoy high approval ratings. A Pulse Asia survey in June found that 82% of Filipinos approved of his performance, with 5% disapproving and the rest undecided.

Those who do oppose the president have argued that martial law has been unnecessarily imposed upon the island of Mindanao, home to 22 million people and the city of Marawi. Many Filipinos remain wary of martial law, which is remembered for its use by former dictator Ferdinand Marcos, who was ousted by popular revolt in 1986.

The island of Mindanao has long been restive, with several concurrent insurgencies raging at any one time for decades. The island is poorer and less developed than the rest of the Philippines. Poverty is particularly prevalent among its minority Muslim population, making it vulnerable to radicalization by Islamic State-inspired groups such as the Maute.

The Philippines government says it intends to rebuild the city of Marawi as a model municipality once the siege is ended, with upgraded medical facilities and other infrastructure. Nearly half a million people have been affected by the fighting, many displaced and dependent on government shelter.

Mr. Duterte has repeatedly said he intends to win in Marawi, even if it means some loss of life. He told reporters on Monday that protecting civilians is a priority but that the militants would be targeted ruthlessly. "If need be, you can bomb the whole place," he said. "I don't mind. But skip the thing about, you know, hurting the children and women.'

Write to Jake Maxwell Watts at jake.watts@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Islamic State Sinks Its Teeth Into the Philippines (June 14)

* Philippines Struggles to Suppress \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Rebels as Foreign Fighters Found (June 1)

* Philippines Declares Martial Law on Southern Island (May 23)

Document WSJO000020170718ed7i000p1
