Foreign Desk; SECTA
Lebanon Reports a Cease-Fire With  ISIS 

By ROD NORDLAND 
461 words
28 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
5
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

DUBAI, United Arab Emirates -- The Lebanese Army and its Syrian and Hezbollah allies separately declared a cease-fire with the Islamic State after a weeklong joint campaign against the militant group along the border with Syria in northern Lebanon, the Hezbollah-controlled television channel Al Manar said Sunday.

There were conflicting accounts, however, about the outcome of the border fighting. The Lebanese Army, which announced the cease-fire in a statement, said the truce had been intended to allow negotiations for the recovery of its missing soldiers. It did not claim to have defeated the Islamic State.

Hezbollah, however, said that fighters from the Islamic State, which is also known as ISIS or ISIL, had surrendered, had turned over the bodies of two Hezbollah combatants and had agreed to help determine what had happened to a number of missing Lebanese Army soldiers.

The Lebanese intelligence chief, Maj. Gen. Abbas Ibrahim, said Sunday that the authorities were awaiting DNA identification for six bodies recovered from the area.

''It has not been confirmed yet that these remains belong to the military soldiers, although we are almost certain they are'' the missing, General Ibrahim said, according to the official National News Agency.

The general made the remarks as he arrived at Riad el-Solh Square, in downtown Beirut, Lebanon, where families of the missing soldiers had pitched tents as part of a sit-in demanding action. The sit-ins have been held since ISIS captured the soldiers in 2014.

In a speech on Thursday, meanwhile, the Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah had said that ISIS had been defeated, but that the authorities were still negotiating to find out the fate of the missing soldiers.

''The remaining ISIS terrorists are completely confused and seek an escape or any settlement to exit the area which they have occupied after being besieged,'' he said in a statement reported by the Syrian Arab News Agency.

A week ago, the Lebanese Army, operating on its side of the frontier, along with the Syrian Army and allied Hezbollah militias fighting on Syrian territory, began a simultaneous offensive against the Islamic State in the border area, although neither side acknowledged that they were acting in concert.

Lebanon would not want to appear to be operating alongside the Syrian government, and the presence of Hezbollah militias from Lebanon fighting in Syria is also politically sensitive.

The Islamic State took nine Lebanese soldiers prisoner in northeastern Lebanon in 2014. The army was believed to be seeking information about them.

Follow Rod Nordland on Twitter @rodnordland .

In Beirut on Sunday, relatives learned bodies of soldiers seized in 2014 might have been found. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANWAR AMRO/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) 

Document NYTF000020170828ed8s00046
