World
U.S. Strike on Syria Shakes Up  ISIS  Fight; Airstrike angers Moscow, posing a new complication for Trump administration's push against extremists

By Thomas Grove in Moscow, Nour Malas in Istanbul and Maria Abi-Habib  in Beirut 
1,164 words
7 April 2017
23:16
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. missile attack on a Syrian air base has created rifts in a calibrated international campaign against Islamic State and threatens military cooperation between the U.S. and Russia.

In an example of the new complications, Moscow said Friday it had suspended an agreement with Washington for military coordination in Syrian skies, but U.S. officials later said the line of communication remained open.

The Kremlin, the Syrian regime's closest ally, called the U.S. salvo of cruise missiles "aggression against a sovereign government" carried out under false pretenses. Russian Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedev said that the strike, conducted in retaliation for a suspected regime chemical attack on a Syrian village in Idlib province, took the U.S. to "the verge of a military clash with Russia."

Russia's response threatens to derail the delicate alliances that have allowed a multination campaign against Islamic State to churn along, despite political disagreements between the U.S., Russia, and Turkey on parts of the fight, including on whether Syrian President Bashar al-Assad should stay in power.

The U.S. attack could also lead to unpredictable reactions by Mr. Assad and his backers, in particular Iran and its Lebanese ally Hezbollah, to the U.S. strikes.

President Donald Trump's praise of Russian President Vladimir Putin during his presidential campaign had raised hopes in Moscow of warming relations, but these have faded amid investigations into alleged Russian interference in the U.S. elections.

Some Russian lawmakers expressed hope that a trip by Secretary of State Rex Tillerson to Moscow next week would help Moscow and Washington coordinate positions.

"Tillerson must be received and (we must) try to exchange positions, lead Washington to common sense," said Leonid Slutsky, head of the Russian parliamentary committee on foreign affairs.

The U.S. and Russia have sought to overcome mutual mistrust to work together to secure a resolution to the Syrian war. A cease-fire last year was seen by both sides as an opportunity to break new diplomatic ground, but it unraveled as Syria violated successive truce attempts.

Military coordination has been more successful. The risks of miscommunication in a crowded battlespace are clear. Hundreds of U.S. military and special-operations forces are rotating through Syrian battlefields. U.S. and Russian jets are flying parallel sorties—he U.S. against Islamic State targets, and Russia mainly against anti-Assad rebels—nd there have been several close calls.

In September, a U.S. airstrike accidentally struck Syrian forces. A Russian airstrike near Manbij, Syria last month hit forces being trained by the U.S. to fight Islamic State.

"If there's no communication it just adds burdens to [U.S.] pilots and to military planners, if you don't have that safety valve," said Aaron Stein, a senior fellow at the Atlantic Council think tank.

Military chiefs from the U.S., Russia and Turkey met a month ago to boost coordination with the specific aim of avoiding conflict among their forces and their proxies on the Syrian battlefield.

A collapse of coordination or surge in hostility among regime allies, including Iranian-backed militias both in Syria and Iraq, could endanger U.S.-backed forces in both countries and potentially put thousands of American forces on the ground in harm's way, according to Arab and U.S. officials.

Among the questions being debated in the quick run-up to Friday's strikes, a U.S. military official said: "Will we lose traction? How will this change the dynamics around Raqqa and Mosul?"—slamic State strongholds in Syria and Iraq.

The official said a strike carries a risk of an unpredictable reaction from Iran, which has at times diverged with Russia in its coordination with the Assad regime.

Advisors to Saudi Arabia's government said they hoped the U.S. strikes would force Damascus to the negotiating table. Riyadh has long pushed for Syrian regime change in a political transition, while also supplying rebels with arms and cash to pressure Damascus militarily to force a negotiated settlement.

Russia's military entered the Syria conflict in 2015, and the U.S. subsequently shied away from more aggressive military action, worried in part about the potential for military escalation with Moscow.

Diplomats in the region said Damascus and its allies could now retaliate against American forces stationed in Syria and Iraq as a deterrent against further U.S. military action.

"The risk of escalation is real," said Faisal bin Farhan al-Saud, an informal adviser to the Saudi Royal Court.

Yet Arab and Western officials in the Middle East said that so far they anticipate a calibrated response from Russia.

If U.S.-Russia tensions rise no further, the current clash is unlikely to derail cooperation in the war against Islamic State, said Sami Askari, an Iraqi former parliamentarian who still advises the Iraqi government on military issues. "Embroiling the coalition and the Syrians in a war amongst each other is most certainly to the benefit of Daesh," he said, using an Arabic acronym to refer to Islamic State.

Kheder Khaddour, a Syria scholar at the Carnegie Middle East Center, said it is unlikely the Syrian regime has "the military capability or appetite for an escalation" that would target American forces in Syria.

The U.S. choice of target, the Shayrat airfield, could also reflect an American effort to contain potential fallout, Mr. Khaddour said, because it isn't a base that is key to protecting regime strongholds or areas of strategic significance.

Pro-Syrian government media and analysts characterized the airfield as a major hub for operations against Islamic State in central and eastern Syria.

Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov compared the strikes to former U.S. President George W. Bush's invasion of Iraq in 2003.

"It's obvious to any specialist that the decision in Washington to carry out strikes was taken before the events in Idlib, which were used as a pretext for a demonstration of force," a foreign ministry statement said. Moscow backs Syria's claims that it has no chemical weapons.

James Marson in Moscow contributed to this article.

Write to Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com, Nour Malas at nour.malas@wsj.com and Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

* U.S. Airstrikes on Syria Divide Middle East 

* With Strike on Syria, Trump Sends a Global Message

* Trump Didn't Have to Contemplate a Power Vacuum in Damascus

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* Trump's Syria Strikes Corner Congress

* President Trump's Syria Statement

Document WSJO000020170407ed47001b9
