House of Cards
Watching
What to Remember Before Watching ‘ouse of Cards’eason 5

By JUDY BERMAN 
1,189 words
30 May 2017
10:45
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Watching is The New York Times’ TV and movie recommendation site.

Frank Underwood has no intention of ending up a one-term president. Having long ago manipulated his way to the Oval Office, Frank (Kevin Spacey), the ruthless politician at the center of Netflix’ “ouse of Cards,”pent the show’ fourth season on the campaign trail —ith his steely wife, Claire (Robin Wright), as an unlikely running mate. Among the new obstacles thrown into his path to absolute power were an ISIS-like terrorist organization known as “CO,”n assassination attempt that left him critically wounded and a worthy rival for the presidency in the charismatic, media-savvy Republican Will Conway (Joel Kinnaman). When the season ended, the election was still three weeks away.

But you could be forgiven for having forgotten all of that. It’ been nearly 15 months (and one exhausting real-life American election cycle) since Netflix released a new batch of “ouse of Cards”pisodes. To jog your memory before Season 5 arrives on Tuesday, May 30, we’e put together a cheat sheet on where the show left every major player at the end of Season 4.

Frank and Claire Underwood

The Underwoods’arriage looked doomed at the beginning of the season, but it really started to turn around after Claire blackmailed Frank into making her his running mate. By the finale, they were working as a team again. When an American ICO cell kidnaps the innocent Miller family and demands the release of their leader, Yusuf al-Ahmadi (Farshad Farahat), the Underwoods attempt to divide and conquer. As Frank negotiates with the terrorists in the War Room, Claire has Ahmadi transported to a government safe house in Virginia, where she talks him into ordering his followers to release the hostages. The terrorists do release the captive mother and daughter in advance of their conversation with Ahmadi, but then the plan backfires. Ahmadi goes off script, ordering his associates to kill the father, James Miller (Sean C. Graham), if they’e captured or if the United States government refuses to set him free.

Interested in getting suggestions on what to watch? Sign up for our newsletter, which we send out every Monday, Wednesday and Friday.

Meanwhile, when the journalist Tom Hammerschmidt (Boris McGiver) publishes a damning report on how Frank schemed his way into the White House, it’ Claire who figures out how the Underwoods can recover. “’ done trying to win over people’ hearts,”he tells Frank. Instead, she realizes that they can use the hostage crisis to capitalize on the public’ fears. Frank delivers a terrifying address to the American people, announcing that he’ ramping up the war on terror. Then, he makes sure that as many people as possible are watching —nd that Claire is by his side —hen ICO slits James’ throat in a live video. Frank’ ominous final words of the season: “e don’ submit to terror. We make the terror.”

Will Conway

Introduced as a charming family man, Frank’ Republican rival turns out to be a canny political operator in his own right, matching the Underwoods blow for blow. He faces a bit of a setback when the White House plants a story about his improper interference with the House Intelligence Committee, but that scoop pales in comparison to Hammerschmidt’ subsequent exposéf Frank. After spotting the headline, “nderwood’ Crooked Path to the Oval Office,”onway tells his wife, “ou’e gonna be the next first lady of the United States.”aybe so, but it seems that the poor guy still doesn’ quite understand who he’ up against.

Tom Hammerschmidt

If anyone comes out of the season finale a winner, it’ Tom. Undeterred by Frank’ weak, off-the-record denial of accusations by the House Minority Whip Jackie Sharp (Molly Parker), Frank’ former chief of staff Remy Danton (Mahershala Ali) and the disgraced ex-president Garrett Walker (Michel Gill), he publishes an article that cites all three of them as sources and may still jeopardize the Underwoods’eign. It also, no doubt, places Tom squarely in Frank’ cross hairs.

Doug Stamper

Doug (Michael Kelly), Frank’ creepily loyal Chief of Staff, arranges for a man named Anthony Moretti to die so that Frank can get the emergency liver transplant that saves his life after the assassination attempt. By the end of Season 4, Doug has donated a large sum of money to Anthony’ memorial fund and struck up a tender friendship with his widow, Laura (Wendy Moniz). In the finale, he drives to Laura’ house, where she kisses his hand and tells him to come back to her place after he’ done at the White House. Considering what happened to Doug’ last girlfriend, let’ hope this ill-advised relationship doesn’ get too serious.

Thomas Yates

Claire’ working relationship with Thomas Yates (Paul Sparks), the author who’ writing a book about the Underwoods, blossoms into a Frank-approved affair during the second half of Season 4. But a single scene between Claire and Thomas in the finale hints that her revitalized marriage could supplant their relationship and even, perhaps, get him exiled from the Underwoods’nner circle. When he asks her whether Hammerschmidt’ story is true, she tells him it isn’. “hat’ the first time you’e lied to me since you stopped lying to me,”e says.

Catherine Durant

Once a prime beneficiary of Frank’ scheming, Secretary of State Cathy Durant (Jayne Atkinson) spends much of Season 4 serving in his administration against her will, after her first attempt to take a stand against his corruption ends with a thinly veiled death threat. The finale suggests that she’ starting to become a dangerous liability for the Underwoods. Angry that Frank all but declared war on national television without consulting her first, she greets him in the final, War Room scene with an accusation: “his is your response to the article.”

Correction: May 30, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of a picture caption with this article misidentified one of the actresses in the accompanying photo. Her name is Jayne Atkinson, not Catherine Durant, which is the name of her character.

Kevin Spacey in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” Netflix | From left, Paul Sparks, Jayne Atkinson, Robin Wright, Kevin Spacey and Derek Cecil in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” David Giesbrecht/Netflix | Joel Kinnaman in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” David Giesbrecht/Netflix | Boris McGiver in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” David Giesbrecht/Netflix | Wendy Moniz and Michael Kelly in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” David Giesbrecht/Netflix | Robin Wright and Paul Sparks in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” Netflix | Jayne Atkinson in the Season 4 finale of “ouse of Cards.” Netflix 

Document NYTFEED020170530ed5u001p5
