Live Briefing
World; Europe
The Latest: May to Confront Trump Over Intelligence Leaks

By THE NEW YORK TIMES 
2,717 words
24 May 2017
17:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

■ Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain  said she would confront President Trump over leaks by American intelligence officials about the bombing investigation.

■ The New York Times was given access to photographs of materials found at the scene of the Manchester bombing that show a detonator, shrapnel and a battery . Other news organizations, like CBS and NBC, had been among the first to reveal the name of the bomber, Salman Abedi .

■ The hunt continued for the “etwork”hat might have helped Mr. Abedi , as the authorities scrambled to avert another attack and to find a possible bombmaker who might have helped Mr. Abedi assemble the sophisticated device he used.

■ Mr. Abedi’ younger brother, Hashem, 20, and father, Ramadan , have been arrested in Libya by a powerful Islamist militia that has accused the brother of being a member of the Islamic State. Salman Abedi had recently traveled to Libya, his family said, and he may have visited Syria as well. Both countries are strongholds for extremist groups.

■ Four more victims  have been identified: a young couple, Chloe Rutherford, 17, and Liam Curry, 19; Eilidh MacLeod, 14; and Elaine McIver, an off-duty police officer.

■ The American pop singer Ariana Grande is suspending her tour  until at least June 5. It was after her concert in Manchester that the terrorist attack occurred.

View more photographs from the investigation and aftermath of the attack here .

Eight Men in Custody in Connection With Attack

At an early afternoon news conference, Chief Constable Ian Hopkins of the Greater Manchester Police said that eight men had been arrested in connection with the attack on Monday. The arrests took place in Manchester, the town of Wigan to the northwest, and to the south in the town of Nuneaton, which is near the city of Birmingham. A woman who was arrested on Wednesday has been released.

“ want to reassure people that the arrests that we have made are significant, and initial searches of premises have revealed items that we believe are very important to the investigation,”hief Constable Hopkins said. “hese searches will take several days to complete, as you would expect. Therefore will there will be some disruption. However, it is very important that we continue with these searches.”

Army Bomb Experts Destroy Suspicious Package

At 10:54 a.m. on Thursday, the Manchester police announced  that an army bomb disposal unit was heading toward Linby Street  in the city’ Hulme neighborhood, just west of the city center. Helicopters flew overhead and sirens blared; some of the commotion could be heard as far away as St. Ann’ Square, where Mancunians gathered to observe the national minute of silence at 11 a.m. A half-hour later, the police announced  that the “he incident has now been deemed safe”nd that the security cordon had been removed.

Bomber Passed Through Turkey and Germany Before The Attack

Officials said on Thursday that Mr. Abedi passed through airports in Istanbul and in Düseldorf, Germany, before the attack.

A Turkish official said that Mr. Abedi had been in transit at Istanbul Airport, possibly after arriving from Libya.

A German intelligence official said that Mr. Abedi passed through Düseldorf airport last week. He arrived from Turkey and continued to Manchester without leaving the transit zone.

Focus, a German magazine that reported that Mr. Abedi, the bomber, had passed through the Düseldorf Airport four days before the attack, also said that he had flown from Frankfurt to Britain in 2015.

Queen Elizabeth II Visits Victims at Manchester Hospital

Queen Elizabeth II visited the Royal Manchester Children’ Hospital, which treated young victims of the attack. Royal officials posted three images of the queen meeting with teenagers who were injured in the explosion. The youngest of them was Amy Barlow, from Rawtenstall, England.

The queen called Ms. Grande “ very good singer,”nd described the attack as “readful,”n video footage broadcast by Sky News. She added that the attack was “ery wicked.”

Theresa May to Discuss Intelligence Leaks With Donald Trump to Discuss Intelligence Leaks With

Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain said on Thursday that she would confront President Trump in Brussels over leaks, attributed to the United States government , about the British investigation into Monday’ bombing in Manchester.

British officials have blamed leaks for reports in the American news media revealing the name of the Manchester bomber before the British authorities were ready to do so, and for disclosing certain details of the investigation, including forensic photographs of the crime scene.

Mrs. May, who will talk with Mr. Trump on Thursday afternoon at a NATO summit meeting in Brussels , said she would “ake clear to President Trump that intelligence which is shared between our law enforcement agencies must remain secure.”

Britain and the United States have perhaps the most intimate intelligence cooperation in the world, but British officials are complaining that the disclosures could harm the investigation.

The BBC reported  that the Manchester police would no longer share details of the investigation with American counterparts. The National Police Chiefs’ouncil said that the “nauthorized disclosure of potential evidence”bout the bombing “ndermines our investigations and the confidence of victims, witnesses and their families.”

The first disclosures came when American television networks, in particular NBC and CBS , revealed the name of the Manchester bomber, Salman Abedi, citing American officials. (The name had also been circulating on social media.) Then, on Wednesday, The New York Times published crime scene photographs  of the bomber’ detonator and parts of the bomb itself. The Times report also pointed out precisely where the bomb had been placed. The Times did not cite its sources, but attributed its account to “reliminary information gathered by British authorities.”

On Wednesday morning, before The Times published its disclosure, Home Secretary Amber Rudd  told the BBC  that she was irritated by the disclosure of the bomber’ identity against the wishes of the British authorities.

“he British police have been very clear that they want to control the flow of information in order to protect operational integrity, the element of surprise, so it is irritating if it gets released from other sources, and I have been very clear with our friends that should not happen again,”s. Rudd said.

—teven Erlanger

The Times’ Response on Manchester Coverage

The New York Times released the following statement about its publication on Wednesday of an article and photographs of evidence collected at the crime scene of the Manchester bombing:

The images and information presented were neither graphic nor disrespectful of victims, and consistent with the common line of reporting on weapons used in horrific crimes, as The Times and other media outlets have done following terrorist acts around the world, from Boston to Paris to Baghdad, and many places in between.

Our mission is to cover news and inform our readers. We have strict guidelines on how and in what ways we cover sensitive stories. Our coverage of Monday’ horrific attack has been both comprehensive and responsible.

We cover stories about terrorism from all angles. Not only stories about victims but also how terrorist groups work, their sources of funding, how they recruit. Acts of terrorism have tremendous impact on how we live, on how we are governed and how we interact as people, communities and nations. At times the process of reporting this coverage comes at personal risk to our reporters. We do it because it is core to our mission.

Abedi’ Brother and Father Arrested in Libya

A powerful Islamist militia in Tripoli said on Wednesday that it had arrested Mr. Abedi’ 20-year-old brother, Hashem, at the family’ home in the Libyan capital on Tuesday, and said that he was a member of the Islamic State who was planning an attack in Tripoli.

“e have been following him for at least a month and a half now,”aid Ahmed Omran, a spokesman for the militia, known as the Special Deterrence Force.

Later, Mr. Omran said the group was also holding the father, Ramadan Abedi, who is also known as Abu Ismail.

The Special Deterrence Force, or Rada, is one of the most powerful militant groups in the often lawless capital. Its leaders are staunch Islamists and it operates a detention facility where many people suspected of being Islamic State fighters have been held.

Mr. Omran said that Hashem Abedi had told the militia that he was “ept in the loop about the attack”n Manchester by his brother, and that the group had said in a Facebook post  that Hashem was involved in the planning of the bombing, although it offered no proof.

The militia also said that Hashem traveled to Libya from Britain on April 16, and that he had been in daily phone contact with his older brother since then.

8 in Custody After Latest Arrests

The Greater Manchester Police said on Wednesday night that two more people, a man and a woman, had been arrested in connection with the investigation. The man was taken into custody in Nuneaton, Warwickshire, in central England, according to the police. The woman was arrested during raids in the Blackley area of Manchester, north of the city center. The police provided no further details.

Early on Thursday morning, the police announced  that they had arrested another man in the Withingon area, in the south of Manchester, adding that the woman arrested in Blackley had been released without charge.

Eight men are now in custody in connection with the attack, the police said on Thursday.

‘ Don’ Believe That It Was Him’

Before his arrest by the Special Deterrence Force in Libya, the bomber’ father said in a phone interview that his son Salman could not have carried out the attack on the Manchester Arena.

“ don’ believe that it was him,”aid the father, Ramadan Abedi. “is ideas and his ideology were not like that. He was born and raised in Britain. He’ a British citizen and he does not hold such ideologies.”

Salman Abedi, born in Manchester in 1994, had recently visited his parents, who had moved back to Libya after living for decades in Britain. The father, speaking from Tripoli, said he believed that his son was on his way to make a religious pilgrimage at the time of the attack.

4 More Victims Identified

Four more victims of the Manchester Arena attack have been identified.

Eilidh MacLeod, 14, of the Isle of Barra, in Scotland. “ur family is devastated and words cannot express how we feel at losing our darling Eilidh,”he family said in a statement. “ilidh was vivacious and full of fun. She loved all music whether it was listening to Ariana or playing the bagpipes with her pipe band.”

Chloe Rutherford, 17, and Liam Curry, 19, of South Shields, in northeast England: “n the night our daughter Chloe died and our son Liam died, their wings were ready but our hearts were not,”the families said in a statement posted on Facebook . “hey were perfect in every way for each other.”

Elaine McIver, a Cheshire police officer: “laine just loved life, and had a major love of music. Despite what has happened to her, she would want us all to carry on regardless and not be frightened by fear tactics, instead she regularly urged us all to rise up against it.”

Manchester Bomber Was Part of a ‘etwork’

Investigators have been focused on determining who may have helped the bomber, Mr. Abedi, plan and execute the attack at the Manchester Arena after an Ariana Grande concert.

“t seems likely —ossible —hat he wasn’ doing this on his own,”ritain’ home secretary, Amber Rudd , said on Wednesday.

Chief Constable Ian Hopkins of the Greater Manchester Police said at a news conference on Wednesday, “his is a network that we are investigating.”

He did not specify whom the police were looking for, or if investigators were searching for a bomb maker.

“here’ an extensive investigation going on, and activity taking place across Greater Manchester as we speak,”e said.

Four men were arrested on Wednesday —hree in Manchester and one in Wigan, a town to the northwest —s the number of people in custody, including Mr. Abedi’ older brother, continued to rise. What role, if any, they played in the attack is unclear.

Evidence photographed and collected  at the crime scene suggests an improvised device made with forethought and care.

The BBC , citing unidentified intelligence sources, reported on Wednesday that officials believed Mr. Abedi had been a “ule,”arrying a bomb made by someone else.

Officials are still trying to find the “actory”here the bomb was made and to discern whether Mr. Abedi received help assembling the device, according to a law enforcement official who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of the secrecy surrounding the investigation.

Officials are also looking into reports that people who knew Mr. Abedi —ncluding an imam at his mosque —ontacted the authorities as much as two years ago with concerns that he had become radicalized.

Salman Abedi’ Possible Radicalization

Friends and neighbors of Salman Abedi have said he expressed extremist views, and a security official has said he traveled to Syria, the stronghold of the Islamic State.

In 2015, according to a neighbor of the Abedi family who spoke on the condition of anonymity because of safety concerns, the imam at the mosque the family attended delivered a sermon condemning terrorism and murder carried out in the name of a political cause. The sermon by the imam, Mohammed Saeed, prompted a heated discussion among congregants, some of whom signed a petition taking issue with it, according to the neighbor.

“e was angry,”he neighbor said of Mr. Abedi. “e scared some people.”

A friend of Mr. Abedi, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity because he feared for his safety, said that the assailant, along with other young men of Libyan descent in Manchester, had been deeply angered by the gang killing last year of a friend, Abdul Wahab Hafidah .

It was around this time, according to people who knew the family, that Mr. Abedi traveled to Libya to see his parents. He also traveled to Syria, according to the French interior minister, Géard Collomb.

Mr. Collomb said that Mr. Abedi had “roven”ies to the Islamic State, but he did not give details. It was not clear whether Mr. Abedi’ visits to Libya and Syria were part of the same trip.

During Mr. Abedi’ visit to Libya, his parents became worried about his radicalization, and even seized his British passport, according to the friend in Manchester.

Mr. Abedi’ father denied this. He said in a telephone interview on Wednesday that his son was not an extremist and was in possession of the passport because he was traveling back to Manchester before going to Saudi Arabia for a religious pilgrimage.

For more breaking news and in-depth reporting, follow @nytimesworld  on Twitter .

* Hunt for Manchester Bombing Accomplices Extends to Libya 

* They Went to Manchester Arena as Homeless Men. They Left as Heroes. 

* Terror Alert in Britain Is Raised to Maximum as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Manchester Attack 

* Manchester Bombing Victims Include at Least 7 Parents 

* Insidious Twist on Terror Attack Victims: Teens and Young Girls with Mothers in Tow 

Queen Elizabeth spoke to Amy Barlow, 12, from Rawtenstall, northwest of Manchester, and her mother, Kathy, during a visit to the Royal Manchester Children’ Hospital. | Pool photo by Peter Byrne | Prime Minister Theresa May at 10 Downing Street on Thursday. | Daniel Leal-Olivas/Agence France-Presse —etty Images | A Libyan militia said on Wednesday that it had arrested Hashem Abedi, Salman’ brother, on charges of being a member of the Islamic State. | Ahmed Bin Salman/Special Deterrent Force, via Associated Press | Salman Abedi | via Associated Press | Liam Curry and Chloe Rutherford | Police officers blocked the road where the Abedi family lived in a Manchester suburb. | Andrew Testa for The New York Times | The Manchester Islamic Center, also known as Didsbury Mosque, said to have been used by Salman Abedi and his family. | Andrew Testa for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170524ed5o005ej
