World
War-Torn Syria's Battered Economy Marked by Inflation and Poverty; Nation's GDP has dropped by more than half this decade; 'a pretty nightmarish' situation

By Raja Abdulrahim 
1,018 words
28 July 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After the Syrian government recently introduced a 2,000-pound bank note—he largest denomination it has ever issued— satirical obituary circulated online for a currency that has lost 90% of its value over more than six years of war.

"The Central Bank of Syria is accepting condolences," it announced.

The introduction of the note, worth less than $4, comes as Syria's economy is in tatters, grappling with wartime inflation, lost production and widespread poverty that could threaten stability even in regime-held areas.

Syria's consumer-price index soared more than 500% between 2010 and 2016, according to Syrian economists and local news reports that cited the Syrian government's Central Bureau of Statistics.

Incomes haven't kept pace. The average civil servant's salary was worth at least $200 a month before the conflict; now, even with raises, it is only worth less than $60, because of the falling currency.

The World Bank estimates that Syria's gross domestic product has fallen by more than half this decade.

The sharp fall in economic activity has cost at least two million people their jobs and about 60% of Syrians are unable to buy food and essential nonfood items, according to the Bank.

"It's going to be a pretty nightmarish economic situation for a long time to come," said David Butter, an economic analyst at U.K.-based think tank Chatham House.

Syria has been divided, in effect, by the fighting. The Syrian regime of President Bashar al-Assad, antigovernment rebels, U.S.-backed Kurds and the militant group Islamic State all control parts of the country.

But the faltering economy spans those areas, and the war has altered consumer behavior. Subsidies for fuel in government-held areas have plummeted, leading more middle-class Syrians, even women, to ride bicycles—arely seen before the war. Panhandlers—any of them children—rowd the streets and even hang around military checkpoints to swarm stopped vehicles.

In some parts of the country, the marriage dowry, paid to the bride as a gift, has almost disappeared. Some grooms give brides 1 Syrian pound— fraction of a penny—s a symbolic gesture.

"The fabric of society has been destroyed," said Jihad Yazigi, Beirut-based editor of an economic trade publication, The Syria Report.

Markets for used goods, which many Syrians once viewed with a measure of shame, have prospered. "There's no security in Syria so why buy new if it could all be destroyed?" said Khalid al-Najjar, who owns a used-car dealership in rebel-held territory in northwest Syria.

Even Facebook groups advertising used items have flourished and prices are typically listed in U.S. dollars.

The regime banned the use of foreign currencies in 2013, but that hasn't stopped people from doing business in dollars because of the volatility of the Syrian pound.

Some landlords demand rent in dollars. Even in the heart of the regime's security apparatus, bribes to release people detained by the regime are sometimes paid in U.S. dollars, according to families who have paid the bribes.

Yet uttering the word "dollar" in public can lead to trouble, and Syrians have taken to using code words such as "green."

With the reliance on larger denominations for Syrian currency, few even bother with coins. Rather than giving a 15-pound coin as change, a pharmacist might give an extra pill instead. At the grocery, change may come in the form of a cookie.

Even government supporters have voiced concern. Ali al-Sattouf, a lawmaker from the city of Aleppo, which the regime recaptured full control of in December, warned last month of "the possibility of a group or groups of citizens in this area or another protesting over hunger or fear of hunger," according to pro-regime media. He called for action to reduce the burden of inflation on Syrians.

The Syrian economy relies on foreign assistance, including wheat from Russia and fuel from Iran. Both countries are major allies of the Assad regime.

Individual Syrians also rely on help from abroad. Many Syrians receive remittances from family members who live elsewhere.

Between 4 million and 5 million Syrians receive food aid from the World Food Program each month. Another million or so receive other food assistance, according to the World Bank. Many who receive food aid end up selling some of it to buy other necessities.

In Aleppo, residents contend with dayslong power cuts months after battles for the city subsided. Some who receive meat as food aid try to sell it on the street because they are unable to refrigerate it or cook it at home and hope to make some money before it goes bad, according to former residents in touch with people in the city.

"People are caught between two pincers, the pincer of war and the pincer of a bad economic situation," said Mulham al-Jazmaty, a researcher with the Syrian Economic Forum, a Syrian think tank based in Turkey.

The 2,000-pound note, the first ever to carry Mr. Assad's image, was introduced this month after a period when the exchange rate had been relatively steady for months.

"We waited until people were assured that the situation was calm and stable," Central Bank of Syria Governor Duraid Durgham said in a video posted online this month by pro-regime media. He added, "Prices are no longer rising like they did previously."

In the days after the government introduced the new note, the Syrian pound lost about 5% of its value as people worried more inflation was coming.

Nikhil Lohade in Dubai and a special correspondent in Syria contributed to this article.

Write to Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* At Least 12 Killed in Syria by Damascus Car Bomb

* U.S. Says It Shot Down Syrian Aircraft

* Civilian Casualties Mount as Coalition Moves to Oust \b ISIS\b0  in Raqqa

Document WSJO000020170728ed7s001pa

