Times Insider
‘ood Example of Profanity Use: Stepping on a Lego Brick’

By LELA MOORE and BRIANNA MILORD 
970 words
29 July 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Here are the top 10 comments of the week on our digital platforms, as selected by our readers and the journalists who moderate nearly every comment. Some comments were edited for length and clarity.

Making a (Swear Word Here) Point

1. Good example of profanity use: Stepping on a Lego brick.

Bad example of profanity use: Shooting your mouth off during an interview with The New Yorker.

—David Kopf on The New York Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the sometimes-necessary impact of cursing.

Trump Bars Transgender People From Military

2. My heart breaks today for our transgender women and men in uniform. Thank you for your courageous service to an ungrateful nation.

—@ShawnSRocks on Twitter, responding to an article about President Donald Trump’ saying that transgender people could no longer serve in the military.

3. You need to be able to trust your unit. Not everyone is accepting unfortunately. It was kinda better with the don’ ask, don’ tell.

—Alison M. Reed on The Times’ Facebook page.

Senate Rejects ‘kinny Repeal’f Health Bill

4. This is a devastating blow to the American people. The ACA has imploded in many states. What are people going to do next year in those states. Has anyone in Washington thought about that?

—Tom in Pennsylvania, reacting to an article about the Senate vote Thursday night to reject a “kinny”epeal of the Affordable Care Act.

5. I am one of your constituents from Anchorage and I thank you for listening to ALL of your Alaska constituents, not just your Republican constituents.

—Alexis Sims-Howard on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, one of three Republicans who voted against the repeal.

After Escaping ISIS, Coping With Shock

6. It is called trauma.

You keep going as long as you can, but when you are finally free, when the unrelenting pressures are gone and the body and mind are no longer fighting for day to day survival, the mind can at last begin to integrate the enormity of the violent experiences and complete degradation they have endured.

These women need rest and comfort.

I hope they can, with time, regain some of the trajectory of their lives before all this happened. It may take a long, long time, even under the best of circumstances, even with the love and support of their families.

Godspeed.

—Ellen in New York, reacting to an article about the trauma endured by women and girls in Iraq’ Yazidi ethnic minority who were held in captivity by the Islamic State.

This comment received more than 600 reader recommendations.

When Foster Care Is a Punishment

7. My siblings and I would have been removed from my mom’ care if the authorities had found out she was leaving us home alone all day every day in the summertime and during school breaks while she worked but I don’ believe we would have fared better in foster care. We were just poor.

My siblings and I were not being abused or neglected. My mom didn’ drink or do drugs and worked very hard to take care of us. Our society loves to castigate poor, single mothers for having children they can’ afford and yet here is our social welfare system punishing them for trying their best to take care of their children.

—MK in New York, reacting to an article about the rising concern over what some call the “riminalizing”f parenting by the Administration for Children’ Services.

This comment received more than 250 reader recommendations.

Saying No to Circumcision

8. We circumcised both of our boys when they were born 17 and 14 years ago, without giving it too much thought. My wife and I are both Jewish, and I’ circumcised as is my entire family. It’ just tradition.

Having been through this primitive and bloody procedure twice (three times if you include my own, but I don’ remember that!), I can’ say for sure I’ subject my sons to the Jewish circumcision ritual again. It seems barbaric and unnecessary.

I disagree completely with the orthodox cantor quoted in the article, who offers no real argument except to say you won’ be in touch with your Jewish heritage if you’e not circumcised. Really? I’ like to see some proof, please.

I’e always felt Jewish, and never considered my sense of Judaism to be contingent on an operation performed on me without my consent at the age of eight days.

—Dan in Chicago, reacting to an article about Jewish families increasingly opting against circumcising baby boys.

Splitting Checks

10. I once got to a dinner late. They drank four bottles of wine before I got there, they all ordered appetizers and entrees. I had a $12 appetizer, a glass of wine and one bite of dessert. When it came to pay the bill they insisted on splitting it equally. I paid $90. I’ still pissed off eight years later.

—Sandra Russo on The Times’ Facebook page, responding to an article about the pitfalls of money sharing and bill-splitting apps like Venmo . The New York Times rounded up other notable reader comments from this story here.

Swearing can increase your ability to withstand pain, according to one study. | Getty Images | Justin Gilliland/The New York Times | Valda Kalnina/European Pressphoto Agency | Cliff Owen/Associated Press | Gabriella Demczuk for The New York Times | Alex Potter for The New York Times | Kevin Hagen for The New York Times | Michael Kirby Smith for The New York Times | Josh Haner/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170729ed7t0028l
