World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Defeat of  ISIS  in Lebanon Gives Hezbollah New Sway

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
709 words
1 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT -- Lebanon's Hezbollah militia has branded the recent expulsion of Islamic State's militants from their main stronghold in the country as a "great victory" akin to forcing out Israel's occupation forces in 2000.

Now the question for Lebanon and the region is whether Hezbollah -- dedicated to the elimination of Israel and considered a terrorist organization by Washington -- translates this triumph of arms into lasting political gains.

On Saturday, parallel operations by Lebanon's army from inside Lebanon and by Hezbollah fighters advancing from Syria cleared out Islamic State's redoubt in the Qalamoun region straddling the border. Controversially, a deal struck by Hezbollah allowed hundreds of Islamic State militants to move to the extremist group's remaining territory in eastern Syria. The decision, criticized by Hezbollah's political opponents inside Lebanon, prompted the U.S. to launch two airstrikes in Syria on Wednesday aimed at stopping the convoy carrying the fighters and their families.

Iran-backed Hezbollah lost much of its luster in the wider Middle East once it sided with the Syrian regime after the revolution there erupted in 2011. But as the Syrian conflict flooded Lebanon with refugees -- and Sunni extremists -- the group has managed to position itself as the defender of the region's minorities, particularly Christians. That has generated domestic support well beyond Hezbollah's Shiite base.

Such an ability to build a broader consensus at home has provided Hezbollah, whose militia is one of the Middle East's most formidable fighting forces, with unparalleled political sway. After a two-year delay, the group's preferred candidate, Christian former army chief Michel Aoun, was elected Lebanon's president in October 2016.

Long-postponed elections for a parliament that would name a new government are slated for May 2018, and the giant victory rally Hezbollah held in the eastern town of Baalbek on Thursday is widely viewed as the kickoff of a campaign to broaden its power -- and its alliances.

Hezbollah's achievement in Qalamoun "will be regarded not only as the growth of its military might, but also of its political influence," said Imad Salamey, director of the Institute for Social Justice and Conflict Resolution at the Lebanese American University in Beirut.

Not everyone agrees. Many Lebanese were upset with how Hezbollah unilaterally negotiated with Islamic State -- an approach that seemed to undermine the authority of the Lebanese army and the Lebanese state.

Regardless of such resentment, nobody in Lebanon today appears in a position to resist Hezbollah's strategic choices, especially now that its status has been consolidated by the outcome of its Qalamoun campaign.

One added complication is Lebanon's relationship with Washington. President Donald Trump described Hezbollah as "a menace to the Lebanese state, the Lebanese people and the entire region" during his meeting with Prime Minister Saad Hariri in July, and U.S. officials are looking for ways to punish the group as part of a campaign to roll back Iranian influence.

Hezbollah's leader Hassan Nasrallah, meanwhile, recently praised Mr. Trump for his determination in fighting Islamic State, and for having described the group as a creation of the Obama administration.

As U.S. officials calculate how to deal with Hezbollah, they are careful not to act in a way that would blow up the Lebanese state and destroy the economy. Any increase in Hezbollah's formal role in Lebanon's government institutions, however, would make an argument against broader sanctions more difficult.

That is why the group is likely to be very careful in how it derives political gains from its victories against Islamic State.

Going forward, Hezbollah is likely to hew to its current strategy, preferring to exercise its authority indirectly and seeking collaboration from other parts of Lebanon's society, people familiar with the group predict.

"In Lebanon, it doesn't matter how strong you are, you have to govern by consensus," said Kamal Wazne, an expert on Hezbollah who heads a think tank in Beirut. "Otherwise you end up in a place where you don't want to be, and we already tried that during the civil war."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170901ed910000o
