World News: Senator Secretly Visits War Zone

By Dion Nissenbaum   
393 words
24 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

WASHINGTON -- Sen. John McCain secretly traveled to northern Syria last weekend to speak with American military officials and Kurdish fighters at the forefront of the push to drive Islamic State out of their de facto capital of Raqqa, according to U.S. officials.

The unusual visit, which officials said was organized with the help of the U.S. military, came as the Trump administration is debating plans for an accelerated military campaign against Islamic State, also known by the acronyms ISIS and ISIL.

Mr. McCain, an Arizona Republican and chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, first traveled to rebel-controlled Syria in 2013, when he met with leaders of the Free Syrian Army, the umbrella group supported by America and its allies. This was believed to be his first visit to Syria since then.

U.S. officials familiar with Mr. McCain's trip said that the senator traveled to Kobani, the Syrian town on the Turkey border controlled by Kurdish forces since 2012.

In a statement, Mr. McCain's office confirmed that a trip took place, saying the senator "traveled to northern Syria last week to visit U.S. forces deployed there and to discuss the counter-ISIL campaign and ongoing operations to retake Raqqa."

Mr. McCain is believed to be the first U.S. lawmaker to travel to the Kurdish-controlled area of northeastern Syria since it became a hub for American special-operations forces who are aiding local forces in the fight against Islamic State.

The short visit came in the middle of a regional trip that took Mr. McCain from Saudi Arabia to Turkey, where he discussed evolving plans to counter Islamic State in the Middle East.

After traveling to Syria, Mr. McCain met with Turkey's President Recep Tayyip Erdogan in the capital. Mr. Erdogan is pushing the Trump administration to sideline the Kurdish fighters that U.S. military leaders view as a vital ally in the fight against Islamic State.

Last month, Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (D., Hawaii), secretly traveled to Damascus, where she held a meeting with President Bashar al-Assad. Last year, Brett McGurk, America's special envoy for the international coalition to defeat ISIS, traveled to Kobani and met with Kurdish fighters, creating an uproar in Turkey.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170223ed2o0001g
