FIRST WORDS
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
Apocalypse Now

By NITSUH ABEBE 
1,524 words
8 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
11
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Last month, after Hurricane Irma rolled over Florida, the state's commissioner of agriculture took in the damage to citrus crops and deemed it ''a unique and existential threat to the industry.'' This was an alarming thing to say: Taken literally, it suggests that one of his state's signature industries might cease to exist. And if it doesn't sound alarming, perhaps that's only because we're surrounded on all sides with existential alarm, to the point where it feels almost like a tic to identify it. In the same month, a corporate lawyer, marveling at Equifax's handling of an enormous data breach, called it ''a botched response to an existential threat.'' Climate change is considered an existential threat to all life on earth; a source in one news report deemed Brexit an existential threat to Irish beef exports.

Through the whole late 20th century, ''existential'' floated through American conversation mostly as a kind of mush -- a loose gesture in the general direction of a loosely grasped idea, something perhaps half-remembered from a film review or philosophy course, something about cigarette smoke and French intellectuals and the grim absurdity of constructing meaning in a universe totally indifferent to our presence. At the start of the '60s, the Times critic John Leonard once wrote, ''whenever something interesting happened in this country it was called 'existential' '' -- there were ''existential presidents, existential prize fights, existential murders, even existential architecture.'' At the word's baggiest, it becomes little more than an upscale synonym for ''deep'' -- as when the protagonist of ''Clueless'' described the animated duo Ren and Stimpy as ''way existential.''

But citrus farmers and beef exporters are not, pretty obviously, reading Camus and struggling to create authentic modes of existence in an absurd vacuum of meaning; they are not pondering what it means to be, even in the Ren-and-Stimpyest sense. What we are talking about when we use the word today is something much more straightforward than continental philosophy. We are talking, for the most part, about whether a thing will continue to exist, or whether it might be at risk of going away.

There are other ways to say this, but none seem as enjoyable. Calling something ''a matter of life and death'' sounds hysterical and alarmist; ''existential threat'' feels more solemn, gravely analytical, as if you've been poring over classified reports with world-weary experts. It is the verbal equivalent of a B-movie scientist somberly removing his glasses.

We say it with abandon now, in every context, about the continued existence of big things and the continued existence of small ones. Artificial intelligence, says Elon Musk, may pose an existential threat to humanity -- but also, say some medical professionals, to the significantly more limited field of human radiologists, who fear being replaced by software. Donald Trump's control of the American nuclear arsenal, according to a psychiatrist named John Zinner, poses an existential threat to the world; to others, Facebook's recent string of bad press presents an existential threat to a large company. (Tech businesses are rife with existential threats: Uber presents an existential threat to taxi services, but it also faces existential threats from potential regulation.) Brain injuries are an existential threat to the sport of football. Tax cuts are an existential issue for the Republican Party. Anything that has the potential to end can be matched with some factor that promises to hasten that end -- and what is there in the universe that cannot, in theory, cease to exist?

Our current use of ''existential'' is about as far removed from artsy-philosophical realms as you can imagine: It's originally the province of defense analysts and foreign-policy think tanks, national-security types and people who write editorials about the Middle East peace process. In 1982, Chancellor Helmut Kohl described Soviet-American talks as having existential importance to West Germany. Through the 1990s, this was how pundits talked about Israel, a nation facing fairly unusual existential threats and conundrums. Debates about Israel seem to be the precise place where ''existential anxiety'' stopped referring to philosophical angst and started referring to the fear your nation could be destroyed.

It was Sept. 11, 2001, that sent existential concerns slamming into American speech. But there was something new, something dissonant, in the way we began to use the word -- a change meant to accommodate the idea that just 19 men might strike at a nation's being. We'd been exposed to an event people found truly unimaginable, one that shifted their sense of the world and what seemed possible in it. And yet, disorientingly, day-to-day American life continued. No armies massed on the country's borders. The nation felt itself plunged into momentous conflict, and yet so much of that conflict existed somewhere else -- not just in remote places but in abstractions and arguments over what developments, far from any battlefield, would indicate that ''the terrorists have won.''

''There is no longer any doubt,'' said Condoleezza Rice in 2002, ''that today America faces an existential threat to our security.'' The fight against terrorism, Vice President Dick Cheney said, was an ''existential conflict.'' It wasn't that terrorists had any capacity to annihilate us, the way South Korea or Israel have feared the prospect of hostile, nuclear-armed neighbors; even our grimmest fears about dirty bombs and biological weapons did not remotely add up to the end of Western civilization. But some terrorists claimed to want to destroy us whole, and many Americans were happy to take up the fight on their terms. Existential conflict took a step back toward the abstract: Now it could be a fight not for our very being but about it.

These two meanings have chased each other in circles for 15 years. Barack Obama, in an interview before his final State of the Union address last year, doggedly stuck to the more straightforward interpretation, professing that ''there are no existential threats'' to the United States -- meaning, as he said in the address itself, that ISIS fighters, much as they might like to pretend so, ''do not threaten our national existence.'' A spokesman for Paul Ryan issued a rebuttal: ''It's absolutely clear that radical Islamic terrorists are determined to destroy the Western way of life.'' They didn't have to be capable of it; they just had to want it.

In 2009, Michael B. Oren, soon to become Israel's ambassador to the United States, wrote an essay for Commentary examining seven ''existential'' threats the nation faced -- noting first how infrequently ''modern states were threatened with their survival'' or wars were fought ''to eliminate another state and its people.'' Foremost among them was the theoretical loss of Jerusalem, without which Israel would be ''rendered soulless,'' becoming ''merely another Mediterranean enclave not worth living in.''

This was an interesting shift in definition. It's not that Israel would be -- as is so often actively threatened -- wiped from the map. But it would lose a thing many consider central to its essence, a thing without which it could no longer be considered itself. But what makes a thing itself? We're brought right back to philosophical questions. What is a nation, really? Precisely what would have to change for America to no longer qualify, in your estimation, as America at all?

It's here that existential threats become subjective, that they lose their gravity and turn back into a vapor. For white nationalists, an America in which minorities mingle and miscegenate and share power with whites is an annihilating, nation-ending danger; for others, America cannot be itself until that happens. For the conservative columnist and radio host Dennis Prager, writing for TownHall in July, ''left-wing-dominated media and universities pose an existential threat'' to Western civilization -- not because they seek to raze cities and scorch the earth, but because they envision it in ways Prager declines to recognize as the thing itself. For people of all stripes, the fear of seeing things destroyed has merged with the fear of seeing them made unrecognizable.

Not 20 years ago, we seemed less apt to think this way. Totalizing, annihilating threats were for cranks, alarmists, extremists and speculating academics. Follow the path of existential danger, though, and you can track a slow shift in the tenor of our conversations. A few decades ago, we were still swaddled in a consensus that made us feel as if things were unlikely to change or end, even if we dearly wanted them to; the order of the world was too firm for that. Now we are more practiced than ever in spotting potential ends. We have made sport of it. We find wrenching, apocalyptic change lurking inside everything -- enough to invoke just the kind of despair European intellectuals used to write plays about.

Sign up for our newsletter to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Nitsuh Abebe is a story editor for The Times Magazine.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY DEREK BRAHNEY; WISIEL/SHUTTERSTOCK) (MM12) DRAWING (DRAWING BY DEREK BRAHNEY) (MM12) 

Document NYTF000020171008eda80006l
