REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
Terror on the Thames

613 words
24 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

British authorities have warned for years that another terror attack is "highly likely," and they were proven right on Wednesday with a bloody assault in Britain's administrative center amid crowds of tourists. Violence and murder for their own sake are still the jihadist calling card.

Police say the attacker, 52-year-old Khalid Masood, drove a car into pedestrians on Westminster Bridge, a site popular for views of Parliament and barely two blocks from Downing Street and the government offices along Whitehall. Masood is alleged to have left the car armed with a knife and then tried to enter Parliament, stabbing a police officer before being shot.

Three victims and Masood were confirmed dead, with 29 injured, some severely. One of the dead was the police officer. Most of the victims were pedestrians on the bridge that spans the River Thames.

Islamic State (ISIS) on Thursday claimed responsibility for the attack, using language suggesting Masood had been inspired by, but not explicitly directed by, the group. Wednesday was the first anniversary of the ISIS attack on the Brussels airport and subway station that killed 32 and injured hundreds.

ISIS has long said it is targeting Britain, and the use of vehicles as deadly weapons has become one of the group's hallmarks, with the truck rampages in Nice in July and Berlin in December. Those attacks also were carried out under ISIS inspiration but not its direct control, and were deadlier than the London attack. It is no longer useful to describe such terrorists merely as "lone wolves" when ISIS and other groups can so easily inspire violence over the internet.

Mark Rowley, Britain's counterterrorism chief, said earlier this month that authorities have thwarted 13 planned attacks of various scales since 2013. Considering that hundreds of Brits have traveled to the Middle East to join Islamic State, the U.K.'s relative safety to date is a credit to its intelligence services.

New details about the attacker raise questions for British counterterror authorities, however. Officials say Masood was born in Britain and had been investigated years ago but was not believed to be a threat. No dragnet is foolproof, but security services owe an account of whether theirs needs refining in light of new evidence and experience.

The attack appears to have originated in Birmingham, around 120 miles northwest of the capital, where the perpetrator rented the car. Residents of that city have been tied to other terror cases, and in 2014 a government investigation uncovered an attempt by some groups to impose extremist teaching in state-run schools. Police rely on members of local communities to tip them to potential threats, and the concern should be whether pockets of Birmingham's community are prone to radicalization. Eight people were arrested in raids in Birmingham, London and elsewhere after Wednesday's attack.

After weeks of calm in Europe -- and years in which the ISIS threat on Britain went unfulfilled -- it was tempting to feel safer. Wednesday's attack is a warning against complacency, as is the U.K. and U.S. ban on electronic devices on flights from certain countries, arising from new information about potential threats.

The terror threat remains far-reaching, and the need continues for surveillance, interrogation and the disruption of terror networks abroad to keep the jihadists on defense. Counterterrorism officials know that more attacks may come as ISIS is forced out of its sanctuaries in Mosul in Iraq and Raqqa in Syria. Amid the political recriminations in the U.S. over election-related wiretapping, keep in mind that intelligence is crucial to public safety.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170323ed3o00015
