N.Y. / Region
Convicted Bomber Tried to Radicalize Fellow Inmates, Officials Say

By BENJAMIN WEISER 
580 words
23 December 2017
02:23
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Federal prosecutors said on Friday that the New Jersey man convicted of detonating explosives in the Chelsea section of New York in September 2016 that injured more than 30 people has been “ttempting to radicalize fellow inmates”t the Manhattan jail where he is being held pending his sentencing.

The inmate, Ahmad Khan Rahimi, gave the other inmates access to speeches and lectures by Osama bin Laden and Anwar al-Awlaki, books on jihad, bomb-making instructions and issues of Inspire, the online magazine published by Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the government said.

The writings were stored on Mr. Rahimi’ laptop, the prosecutors said, and were part of the discovery materials that were provided to him during his case.

The government said that the inmates Mr. Rahimi shared the materials with included Sajmir Alimehmeti, a Bronx man who has been charged with providing material support to the Islamic State, and is scheduled for trial next month.

The allegations against Mr. Rahimi came in a letter on Friday from the office of Joon H. Kim, the acting United States attorney in Manhattan, to Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court, who is to sentence Mr. Rahimi on Jan. 18. Mr. Rahimi, who was convicted in October, faces a mandatory life sentence for his convictions.

Mr. Rahimi had met with some of the inmates to whom he gave the terrorist writings during Friday prayer sessions at the Metropolitan Correction Center, the government’ letter said.

The letter said evidence at Mr. Rahimi’ trial showed that his attack had been “otivated by a violent ideology espoused by terrorist leaders”ike Mr. bin Laden and that he had studied Mr. Awlaki’ speeches and Inspire magazine.

Mr. Kim’ office wrote that after jail employees learned of Mr. Rahimi’ “adicalization efforts,”hey searched his personal property and found an address book containing the names and inmate numbers of other terrorism defendants, including Muhanad Mahmoud Al Farekh, a Texan convicted of helping to plan a 2009 attack on a United States Army base in Afghanistan, and Maalik Alim Jones, a Maryland man who pleaded guilty to conspiring to support the Shabab in Somalia.

Mr. Kim’ office noted that Mr. Rahimi, Mr. Alimehmeti and another unidentified inmate with whom Mr. Rahimi was accused of sharing the materials are all represented by the federal public defender’ office, and asked that Judge Berman hold a hearing to ensure that Mr. Rahimi had knowingly waived any potential conflict of interest that might exist.

In a separate letter to the judge, which was also filed publicly on Friday, Mr. Rahimi said he began a hunger strike on Dec. 8, complaining that his family was not being permitted to visit him and he had not been allowed to call his lawyer.

“ am extremely frustrated and physically tired and mentally drained of the continuous run around they are giving me,”r. Rahimi wrote. Judge Berman ordered that the government and Mr. Rahimi’ lawyer each file responses.

One of Mr. Rahimi’ public defenders, Sabrina Shroff, declined to comment on both the government’ and Mr. Rahimi’ letter, as did Mr. Kim’ office; a jail spokesman did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

* Chelsea Bomb Suspect Guilty in Attack That Sowed Terror Across Region

* Bronx Man Accused of Trying to Join \b ISIS\b0  Is Arrested

Document NYTFEED020171223edcn000gp
