World News: World Watch

377 words
13 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

UNITED KINGDOM

Wage Growth Slowest

In Nearly Three Years

Wages after inflation rose at their slowest pace in nearly three years in the three months through February, adding to signs that Britons are facing a squeeze in living standards despite a tightening labor market.

The figures highlight a potential drag on the U.K.'s economic growth just as it begins to negotiate its exit from the European Union, expected to last at least two years. Economic growth relies heavily on domestic demand, which is likely to falter as wages struggle to keep up with prices.

Adjusted for inflation, regular wages in the December-February period grew by 0.1%, the slowest pace since mid-2014, the Office for National Statistics said. Annual inflation stood at 2.3% in February and March, the fastest rate in more than three years, overshooting the Bank of England's 2% target.

Data showed that growth in wages faltered despite a robust labor market, with employment and the number of vacancies at record highs.

The unemployment rate was unchanged at 4.7%, in line with the expectations of analysts polled by The Wall Street Journal.

The unemployment rate was last lower in the summer of 1975, the ONS said. Official data suggest inflation is already souring British shoppers' moods.

-- Wiktor Szary and Jason Douglas

---

AFGHANISTAN

ISIS Suicide Bomber

Kills Five in Kabul

An Islamic State suicide bomber on foot detonated his vest near the gates of the Ministry of Defense in Kabul, an attack Afghan officials said killed at least five people and wounded three others.

Wednesday's assault was the latest in a string claimed in Afghanistan by the extremist group, which has expanded its presence in the country even as it loses territory to U.S.-backed forces in Iraq and Syria. Islamic State in recent months has claimed the majority of high-profile attacks in Afghanistan's capital, despite increased pressure by U.S. and Afghan forces on its stronghold in the country's east.

The group's Afghan affiliate said it had struck the gates of Afghanistan's presidential palace in a statement posted to its official Amaq news agency.

-- Jessica Donati and Habib Khan

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170413ed4d00012
