World; Asia Pacific
Graves Fill an Afghan Mosque’ Garden After a Terrorist Attack

By MUJIB MASHAL 
1,176 words
26 August 2017
22:20
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan —vernight, a small garden of pink and red roses at a Shiite mosque in Kabul was turned into a cemetery.

Before Friday, old men had often lingered in the garden, thumbing their prayer beads or making small talk before entering the worship hall. But on Saturday, some of those men were buried in the garden, some with their wives, all victims of a terrorist attack.

The exact death toll from the attack on the Imam Zaman mosque, which lasted nearly four hours, is unclear. The Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission put the number of dead at 40 and said 90 people were wounded. Congregation members said at least 40 people had been killed and possibly more than 50.

At least six attacks on Shiite places of worship in Afghanistan have left more than 80 dead this year. The Islamic State group has claimed responsibility for many of those attacks, including the one on Friday.

The elders at the Imam Zaman mosque, in northern Kabul, said the burial of the dead in the garden would help congregation members in the years to come remember the cost of a simple prayer.

“e wanted this to be their memorial also, so everyone coming for worship can pray for their souls,”aid Hajji Abdul Razaq Sakha, one of the elders of the mosque. “his is our place of prayer; this is our fortress. They can kill us, but we won’ leave.”

Details of the assault and the attackers remained unclear. Mosque elders, as well as some security officials, said four suicide bombers had entered after shooting the guard and had shot their way upstairs to the women’ section. Most of the men who survived the first round of gunfire rushed through the back doors or jumped from the windows. Dozens hid at the home of the mosque’ imam, in the corner of the compound, before they were rescued by an elite unit of police officers.

“ne of the suicide bombers blew himself up upstairs in the women section, and one by the entrance downstairs,”aid one of the worshipers who had fled.

He added: “he question is: What happened to the other two?”aybe they escaped, he said, and will “eturn another day.”

On Saturday, the mosque’ main hall smelled of smoke and blood, and its ceiling and chandelier had turned black. In a corner were partly burned religious texts. Outside, a pile of unclaimed shoes.

Upstairs, in the women’ section, the carpet was spattered with patches of blood. A single fan continued to spin. On the soot-covered wall between two arched windows was a message in white chalk: “y sister, congratulations on your martyrdom!”

Most of the victims were women or elderly men who could not make it out in time. Among the more than 20 victims buried in the mosque’ garden were a couple in their 70s, Hajji Ghulam Hassan Behsudi and his wife, Fatima Behsudi.

The Friday Prayer service was usually a family occasion for the Behsudis; as many as eight adults would attend. But on the day of the attack, the children and grandchildren stayed home and prepared a beef stew for after the prayer service. Before they left for the mosque, a couple of blocks away, Mr. Behsudi ate some grapes, and his wife had a slice of melon.

Mr. Behsudi, originally from Maidan Wardak Province, had moved to the neighborhood about 50 years ago, when the first of their eight children was just a year old. The family had a shop in Kabul’ main market, the Mandawi. He had a bad knee and often walked with a cane.

Mrs. Behsudi had a sore back, some trouble with her disk. She often told her three daughters-in-law how easy they had it. As a young bride in the village, she had to take care of the cows and help with the farm along with other chores, and husbands in those days were often more violent and abusive.

As soon as they heard about the attack, the couple’ children ran toward the mosque. One of the daughters, Tahera, 32, said she had begged the police to let her through the security cordon. They refused.

After the bodies of her parents had been retrieved to be prepared for burial, Tahera said her mother had three bullet wounds and bruises on her face. Her father had been shot four times.

“he bleeding would not stop,”he said. “o we wrapped them in plastic before putting them in the shroud.”

Around noon on Saturday, men formed three rows in the mosque’ courtyard for the funeral prayers.

The two graves were dug next to each other. After 50 years together, the couple would now be separated by a thin mud wall. Mr. Behsudi was first to be lowered into the earth.

One of his sons, Ghulam Nabi, climbed down into the grave for one last look at his father.

“o, father, go,”e said. “his is our last visit. You did a lot for us.”

His brother, Ghulam Hussain, climbed atop the mound of dirt beside the grave to carry out a ritual obligation.

“f my father owed out anyone anything, raise your voices now so we can take care of his debts,”e told the crowd.

Then, the body of Mrs. Behsudi was lowered into her grave. Both graves were covered with flat rocks, and the cracks were sealed with mud. Then men shoveled dirt over the bodies.

Within minutes, the graves were covered and marked by two headstones.

Around them, the burials continued. Bodies arrived for a final prayer and were then carried to the garden and their graves, past the few remaining roses along the edges. Politicians arrived to offer condolences, give speeches and pose for photographs.

The imam offering the final prayers gave a spirited speech, urging unity. He began with a poem, part of which said:

The young people are saying the elders are all gone

We, too, are going —ecause our friends are all gone.

Fatima Faizi and Jawad Sukhanyar contributed reporting.

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Deadly Attack on Shiite Mosque in Afghanistan

* Afghan Mosque Suicide Bombing Kills at Least 20

* Gunmen Attack Crowded Shiite Shrine in Kabul

* Islamic State Again Strikes at Afghan Shiites, Killing at Least 30 in Kabul

Funerals took place Saturday for victims of an attack on a Shiite mosque in Kabul, Afghanistan. Dozens of people, including women and children, were killed. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press | Afghans on Saturday took photographs of burned pages of the Quran inside the Shiite mosque that was attacked in Kabul. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press | The shoes left behind by the victims of the attack on a Kabul mosque lay in a pile near the entrance on Saturday. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press | Many of the victims of the attack on the mosque in Kabul were buried in the mosque’ garden on Saturday. | Rahmat Gul/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170826ed8q003h1
