World; Europe
Kremlin Asks Fox News to Apologize to Putin After O’eilly Calls Him ‘ Killer’

By KIMIKO de FREYTAS-TAMURA 
519 words
6 February 2017
16:43
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Russia sought an apology from Fox News on Monday after the host Bill O’eilly described President Vladimir V. Putin as “a killer”uring an interview with President Trump.

The Kremlin’ spokesman, Dmitri S. Peskov, told reporters that the description was “nacceptable, insulting,”ccording to the the Interfax news agency and state-run RIA Novosti agency.

“e consider such words from a Fox News correspondent to be unacceptable, insulting,”e said. “f course, we would prefer to receive apologies to our president from such a respectable television network.”

In the interview, which aired on Sunday, Mr. O’eilly asked Mr. Trump how he felt about the Russian leader.

Watch Bill O’eilly’ interview with President @realDonaldTrump Sunday at 4p ET during the #SuperBowl pregame show on FOX. pic.twitter.com/OcRVRK8JgR —ox News (@FoxNews) February 4, 2017

Mr. O’eilly: “o you respect Putin?”

Mr. Trump: “ do respect him.”

Mr. O’eilly: “o you? Why?”

Mr. Trump: “ell, I respect a lot of people, but that doesn’ mean I’ going to get along with them. He’ a leader of his country. I say it’ better to get along with Russia than not. And if Russia helps us in the fight against ISIS —hich is a major fight —nd Islamic terrorism all over the world —ajor fight —hat’ a good thing. Will I get along with him? I have no idea. It’ very possible that I won’.”

Mr. O’eilly: “e’ a killer though. Putin’ a killer.”

Mr. Trump: “here are a lot of killers. You think our country’ so innocent?”

The president’ response, which appeared to equate Mr. Putin’ actions with those of the United States, drew outrage and dismay on social media.

An open admirer of the Russian leader, Mr. Trump has taken a conciliatory approach toward Mr. Putin, whose tenure has been known for human rights abuses, the brutal suppression of political dissent and the unnatural deaths of many political opponents.

Mr. Peskov declined to comment on Mr. Trump’ response to Mr. O’eilly.

On Monday night, Mr. O’eilly addressed the demand for an apology. Referring to the Russian president as “ld Vlad,”e said, “’ working on that apology but it may take a little time. You might want to check in with me around 2023.”

John Koblin and Ivan Nechepurenko contributed reporting.

Correction: March 7, 2017, Tuesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: Because of an editing error, an article in some editions on Feb. 7 about Russia’ request for an apology from Fox News after a network host, Bill O’eilly, called the Russian president, Vladimir V. Putin, a killer referred incorrectly to a Russian news agency, Interfax. It is commercial and independently owned; it is not state-run.

Bill O’eilly in 2015, hosting “he O’eilly Factor”n Fox. | Rob Kim/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170206ed26004jx
