U.S.; Politics
Sessions Says Guantáamo Is a ‘ery Fine Place’or New Suspects

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
845 words
10 March 2017
03:09
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —ttorney General Jeff Sessions said on Thursday that he would advise President Trump to send newly captured terrorism suspects to the wartime prison at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba, which he called “ very fine place,”ather than to bring them to civilian court for prosecution by the Justice Department he now runs.

“here’ plenty of space,”r. Sessions said of the prison. “e are well equipped for it. It’ a perfect place for it. Eventually, this will be decided by the military rather than the Justice Department. But I see no legal problem whatsoever with doing that.”

As a senator, Mr. Sessions was a critic of former President Barack Obama’ efforts to close the prison and his refusal to bring any new captives to it. But Mr. Sessions’ remarks, in an interview with the conservative talk radio host Hugh Hewitt, were his first extensive public comments on the topic since becoming attorney general last month.

Mr. Hewitt did not raise the question of whether the United States would seek to take custody of Abu Khaybar, who is suspected of being a Qaeda militant and was captured last fall in Yemen by another country, nor what should happen to terrorism suspects who are American citizens. Mr. Trump said during the campaign that he was “ine”ith sending Americans to Guantáamo.

But Mr. Hewitt brought up the troubles of the military commissions system operating at Guantáamo, in which the death penalty case against Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and four others accused of conspiring in the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks has been mired in years of pretrial hearings with no actual trial yet in sight.

Mr. Hewitt observed that the commissions system “s not getting them to trial”nd called it “ind of a scandal that no one has faced justice 15 years later.”e asked Mr. Sessions whether he expected to accelerate the process.

Mr. Sessions told Mr. Hewitt that he had asked a “ood question.”nd while the attorney general reiterated his support for the idea of military prosecutions of Qaeda members, he also said it was time to think through “o what extent we’e going to use military commissions.”

“e’e got to get the military on board,”r. Sessions said. “y now, we should have worked through all the legal complications that the Obama administration seemed to allow to linger and never get decided, so nothing ever happened. So it is time for us in the months to come to get this thing figured out and start using it in an effective way.”

Mr. Sessions did not explain what he thought the military had done wrong, nor what he was suggesting as an alternative. But he pointed out that there is no need to prosecute anyone at Guantáamo in the sense that the detainees can be held in open-ended detention without trial while the war continues.

And he spoke disparagingly of transferring the Sept. 11 case to civilian court, which the Obama administration wanted to do before Congress barred transferring detainees onto domestic soil for prosecution.

“n general, I don’ think we’e better off bringing these people to federal court in New York and trying them in federal court where they get discovery rights to find out our intelligence, and get court-appointed lawyers and things of that nature,”e said.

The two factors Mr. Sessions identified are not unique to civilian trials. The commissions system’ rules for discovery of intelligence are modeled after civilian courts’ules, which are set by the Classified Information Procedures Act. And defendants in the military commissions system get government-provided defense lawyers, too.

Mr. Sessions’ interview came in a week in which the Trump White House twice put forth false information about Guantáamo.

On Tuesday, Mr. Trump falsely said on Twitter that “22 vicious prisoners, released by the Obama Administration from Gitmo, have returned to the battlefield.”ut 113 of the 121 former detainees deemed to be “onfirmed”ecidivists by the intelligence community were transferred under the Bush administration.

At a briefing on Wednesday, the White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, acknowledged that Mr. Trump had gotten that wrong, but then falsely said that “ost”eleases under former President George W. Bush were “ourt-ordered.”ut habeas corpus rulings accounted for only three of the 593 ex-detainees transferred by the Bush administration.

Get politics and Washington news updates via Facebook, Twitter and in the Morning Briefing newsletter.

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter @charlie_savage.

* Case of Captive in Yemen Could Test Trump’ Guantáamo Pledge

* Fact-Check: Trump Is Wrong About Guantáamo Detainees

* \b ISIS\b0  Detainees May Be Held at Guantáamo, Document Shows

* Obama Transfers 4 From Guantáamo, Leaving 41 There as Term Ends

A United States officer at the entrance at Guantáamo Bay, Cuba. Attorney General Jeff Sessions said on Thursday that he would advise President Trump to send newly captured terrorism suspects to the prison. | John Moore/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170310ed3a000um
