U.S. News: U.S. Watch

283 words
3 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

TRUMP ADMINISTRATION

Congress Urged to

Retain War Powers

The Trump administration urged Congress not to revise the law underpinning the global war on terrorism and armed conflict in Iraq and Afghanistan, arguing Wednesday that the Pentagon already has the legal authority it needs under a war authorization passed after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.

In a letter to the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Affairs Committee, a State Department official said that the administration "is not seeking revisions" the 2001 Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists, also know as an AUMF, nor is it seeking additional congressional authority to fight terrorist groups across the globe.

"The United States has sufficient legal authority to prosecute the campaign against al-Qaida and associated forces, including against the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS)," Charles Faulkner, an official with the State Department's bureau of legislative affairs wrote to Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.) Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Defense Secretary Jim Mattis also traveled to Capitol Hill to brief the Foreign Relations committee on the administration's position.

-- Byron Tau

---

FBI

Senate Confirms

Director Nominee

Christopher Wray , President Donald Trump 's pick to lead the Federal Bureau of Investigation , won Senate confirmation with the support of most Democrats, putting the former Justice Department official and private lawyer in charge of an agency buffeted by political crosswinds.

The bipartisan nature of the 92-5 vote Tuesday was a shift after Mr. Trump's abrupt firing in May of the last FBI director, James Comey . Mr. Comey's dismissal alarmed lawmakers in both parties, but Democrats were especially critical.

-- Aruna Viswanatha and Del Quentin Wilber

Document WSJE000020170803ed8300019
