EDITORIALS
Editorial Desk; SECTSR
Congress's Duty in the War With  ISIS 

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
659 words
26 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On the verge of driving the Islamic State out of Mosul, once Iraq's second-largest city, the United States and its allies are beginning a push to recapture Raqqa, the Syrian city that is the de facto capital of the self-declared caliphate.

Hundreds of Syrian rebels and their American military advisers, backed by American artillery and attack helicopters, have started shutting down the western approaches to the city. There is talk of reinforcing the roughly 900 American troops who are now in the country. Instead of conducting airstrikes and relying on Syrian and Kurdish forces for ground operations, as they have done for months, the Americans are now involved with tanks and troops, a more direct and far riskier role.

But as the American military is doing its job, Congress is refusing to do its duty. Nearly three years into the war against ISIS, lawmakers have ducked their constitutional responsibility for making war by not passing legislation authorizing the anti-ISIS fight. This is not merely a bureaucratic issue. While the president has the power to order troops into battle, the founders were adamant about ensuring that only Congress could commit the nation to protracted overseas military actions.

Since President Obama began the fight against ISIS in 2014, the Pentagon has operated under the 2001 authorization for the use of military force that was passed after Al Qaeda's 9/11 attacks. But that justification is of questionable legality because ISIS did not exist when the authorization was approved.

The United States can claim a legal basis for its involvement in Iraq because Baghdad sought American help, which includes airstrikes, drones and thousands of troops, some of whom trained Iraqi units and others who are advisers now positioned close to the fighting. But there has been no such request from the Syrian government, which believes that a U.S.-led attack on Raqqa would be illegitimate unless it were coordinated with Damascus, the chief Syrian negotiator to peace talks in Geneva, Bashar Ja'afari, said on Friday. Such coordination is unlikely, given how little the Pentagon thinks of President Bashar al-Assad and his Russian backers.

Past efforts to enact a new ISIS-related authorization of military force, by Senator Tim Kaine, a Virginia Democrat, and others, have been stymied because of congressional fecklessness. But Mr. Kaine is quietly soliciting support for a new proposal. The issue received fresh attention last week when Senator Tom Udall, a New Mexico Democrat, told Defense Secretary Jim Mattis that it could be argued that the United States had ''effectively invaded northern Syria, violating the sovereignty of a country in the Middle East.''

Mr. Mattis replied that because ISIS had basically erased the border between Iraq and Syria, the United States could not ''draw that imaginary line in the midst of an enemy'' and say it's safe on one side. Even so, he said he would ''take no issue'' if Congress passed a new authorization, viewing it as a ''statement of the American people's resolve'' to fight ISIS.

More than just a political endorsement of the troops, however, a new authorization of force could make Congress seriously debate how the rest of the war against ISIS will be fought, and to consider a crucial decision the administration must make soon on whether to arm Syrian Kurds for the Raqqa fight and risk alienating Turkey, a NATO ally.

Congressional inaction may invite an even bigger problem. The Trump administration intends to bring future ISIS detainees to the Guantáamo Bay prison. Once that happens, as the former Bush administration lawyer Jack Goldsmith wrote on the Lawfare blog, court challenges could lead to findings that the war against ISIS is unlawful.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTOpinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

DRAWING (DRAWING BY BRIAN STAUFFER) 

Document NYTF000020170326ed3q0009f
