National Desk; SECTA
Long Island Man Is Charged With Trying to Join  ISIS 

By ELI ROSENBERG; Jack Begg contributed research. 
608 words
5 March 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
23
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

A Long Island man was ordered held without bail on Saturday after federal authorities accused him of twice traveling to the Middle East in recent years in an effort to ''wage violent jihad'' alongside terrorist groups.

The man, Elvis Redzepagic, was arrested on Friday at his home in Commack, N.Y., on charges of attempting to provide material support and resources to terrorists, federal officials said.

Mr. Redzepagic, 26, is accused of trying to join the Islamic State or the Nusra Front in 2015 and 2016, according to a criminal complaint unsealed on Saturday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

''This defendant made numerous attempts to travel to Syria to wage violent jihad,'' Robert L. Capers, the United States attorney in Brooklyn, said in a statement. ''We will continue to track down and prosecute individuals like the defendant before they are able to become foreign fighters or harm the United States and its allies.''

According to the complaint, Mr. Redzepagic first spoke to federal agents after being arrested in Suffolk County in February for an unrelated offense. In interviews with investigators from a joint terrorism task force, he said he had become a Muslim while he was in Montenegro.

In 2015, the complaint said, Mr. Redzepagic began communicating with a cousin who he believed was a member of the Islamic State or the Nusra Front and the commander of a battalion in Syria.

Mr. Redzepagic told the authorities that the cousin, who was not identified, instructed him to travel to Istanbul and contact him when he got there, according to the complaint.

Based on Mr. Redzepagic's account and airline and customs records, the complaint said, the authorities determined that he had indeed traveled to Turkey that year, spending about seven days in Istanbul and making ''several unsuccessful attempts to obtain help and cross the border into Syria.''

The complaint said Mr. Redzepagic told the authorities ''he was prepared to strap a bomb on and sacrifice himself for jihad.''

He also told investigators he believed that fighting in Syria was different from committing a domestic act of terrorism and that he did not want to harm innocent people, the complaint said.

Unable to reach his cousin and ''frustrated by the lack of assistance he was receiving, and unable to enter Syria,'' the complaint said, Mr. Redzepagic returned to the United States.

During interviews with the terrorism task force, Mr. Redzepagic expressed admiration for Anwar al-Awlaki, an American-born cleric and propagandist for Al Qaeda who was killed in a drone strike conducted by the United States in 2011.

After obtaining a search warrant, investigators searched a Facebook account used by Mr. Redzepagic where they found messages he had sent, including ''I read a lot about jihad,'' and ''since I got back from turkey from trying to perform Jihad and join Jabhat Al Nusra the cia has been bothering me,'' according to the complaint.

In August 2016, the complaint said, Mr. Redzepagic went to Jordan planning to enter Syria. But he was stopped by Jordanian officials and returned to the United States. Mr. Redzepagic told Customs and Border Protection officials who debriefed him when he returned that the purpose of his trip was to learn Arabic.

Mildred M. Whalen, a lawyer for Mr. Redzepagic, said in an email that he had been ''fully cooperative with law enforcement.''

''We will be working with his family in the hope that the court and the government will see that what he needs is counseling and support, not imprisonment,'' Ms. Whalen said.

Document NYTF000020170305ed350004b
