The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Haunted by  ISIS 

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
555 words
21 July 2017
12:04
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

After Mosul, Iraq, was liberated, two Times reporters encountered a group of Yazidi women —embers of a Kurdish religious minority targeted by the Islamic State —ho had been enslaved by the militant group for years.

Days after the city’ fall, the women still believed that the Islamic State had taken over the world.

On today’ episode:

Rukmini Callimachi, who covers the Islamic State and terrorism for The Times, and Andy Mills, a producer for “he Daily”ho is in Iraq with her, describe the Yazidi women they encountered there.

Background reading:

Ms. Callimachi has been reporting from Mosul for weeks, as Iraqi forces pushed Islamic State militants from the city.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, managing producer; Lynsea Garrison, producer; Rachel Quester, producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

Souhayla Taalo, one of the many Yazidi woman who were kidnapped by the Islamic State, outside the home of an uncle who wants her story to be told. | Alex Potter for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170721ed7l002mh
