World; Europe
Plot to Kill U.K. Prime Minister Foiled, Court Hears

By ALAN COWELL 
752 words
6 December 2017
12:56
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

LONDON —ounterterrorism officers thwarted a terrorist attack targeting the British prime minister, Theresa May, prosecutors said when two suspects in their early 20s appeared in court on Wednesday.

Word of the planned attack coincided with what the authorities have depicted as mounting concern about the intensity, scale and pace of conspiracies by violent extremists.

There have been five terrorist attacks in Britain this year alone, killing dozens of people in total. An official report on Tuesday said the worst of those assaults —t a concert by the pop star Ariana Grande in Manchester in May —ight have been averted “ad the cards fallen differently.”

The planned attack on Mrs. May was to begin with a bombing of the security gates that protect 10 Downing Street —he home and office of British prime ministers —s a prelude to an attempt to stab her to death, prosecutors said.

Two suspects —aa’mur Zakariyah Rahman, 20, and Mohammed Aqib Imran, 21 —ere arrested Nov. 28. Mr. Rahman, a resident of north London, is accused of planning the bombing and knife attack. Mr. Imran, from Birmingham in the English Midlands, is accused of preparing acts of terrorism by traveling to Libya to join the Islamic State militant group.

Mark Carroll, a prosecutor, told the Westminster Magistrates’ourt on Wednesday that Mr. Rahman had planned to set off explosives at the gates of 10 Downing Street. In the ensuing chaos, he hoped to gain access to Mrs. May’ office and stage a “econdary attack”sing “ suicide vest, pepper spray and a knife.”is purpose was to “ttack, kill and cause explosions.”

The accused did not indicate how they would plead when the case went before a higher court at the Old Bailey, London’ central criminal court, on Dec. 20.

In Parliament on Tuesday, the home secretary, Amber Rudd, said 22 Islamist plots had been prevented in the past four years, nine since March, when an assailant in a sport utility vehicle ran over pedestrians and stabbed a police officer outside Parliament. Five people died in that attack, including the assailant, a 52-year-old Briton, Khalid Masood.

In May, Salman Abedi, a 22-year-old Briton of Libyan descent, blew himself up outside the concert hall in Manchester, killing himself and 22 other people.

In June, three men —huram Shazad Butt, a British citizen born in Pakistan; Rachid Redouane, a failed asylum seeker who said he was Moroccan or Libyan; and Youssef Zaghba, an Italian of Moroccan ancestry —drove a van into pedestrians on London Bridge and then used knives to attack people around the nearby Borough Market. Eleven people died, including the three assailants, who were shot by the police.

Later that month, a British man, Darren Osborne, drove a van into a crowd of worshipers outside Finsbury Park mosque in London. One man died soon afterward, and Mr. Osborne has been charged with murder.

On Tuesday, an official report into attacks in May and June said counterterrorism officers had misinterpreted two items of intelligence handed to them before the killings in Manchester. Mr. Abedi was not being actively investigated at the time of the attack, but the items of intelligence could have led to an inquiry had their “rue significance been properly understood.”

Counterintelligence officers “ot a great deal right,”he report said. “articularly in the case of Manchester, they could have succeeded had the cards fallen differently.”

The report was written by David Anderson, a senior lawyer commissioned by Ms. May to examine counterterrorism efforts.

Separately, Scotland Yard said on Tuesday, “he U.K. is facing an intense threat from terrorism, one which is multidimensional, evolving rapidly and operating at a scale and pace we have not seen before.”

Counterterrorism specialists have said one source of concern is that Islamic State combatants may be returning to Britain after military defeats in Iraq and Syria. Ms. Rudd said on Tuesday that Britain’ security services were embroiled in more than 500 investigations involving more than 3,000 people.

* Deadly Attack Near U.K. Parliament; Car Plows Victims on Westminster Bridge

* Terror Alert in Britain Is Raised to Maximum as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Manchester Attack

* In Manchester, a Loud Bang, Silence, Then Screaming and Blood

Police officers outside 10 Downing Street in London, the official residence of the British prime minister, on Wednesday. | Toby Melville/Reuters | Prime Minister Theresa May. | Daniel Leal-Olivas/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171206edc6003e9
