Foreign Desk; SECTA
Head of  ISIS  Branch in Afghanistan Killed in April Raid

By MUJIB MASHAL; Michael R. Gordon contributed reporting from Washington, and Fahim Abed contributed from Kabul. 
648 words
8 May 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
6
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

KABUL, Afghanistan -- The leader of the Islamic State affiliate in Afghanistan who orchestrated audacious attacks that further upended the country's deteriorating security situation was killed in a special forces raid last month, the president of Afghanistan said in a statement on Sunday.

The militant leader, Abdul Hasib, had overseen a number of bloody attacks that directly challenged the authority of President Ashraf Ghani, including a massacre at the main Afghan Army hospital in Kabul that killed at least 50 people.

Mr. Hasib was killed in an operation on April 27 in eastern Nangarhar Province, along the border with Pakistan, according to the statement by Mr. Ghani's office. The statement said the government had waited for verification that Mr. Hasib had been killed in the raid before announcing his death. It did not say how his death had been confirmed.

The United States military command in Afghanistan said in a statement on Sunday that American forces had participated in the raid that killed Mr. Hasib and up to 35 other militants.

It was the second time in nine months that the leader of the Islamic State in the Khorasan, as the Afghanistan affiliate is known, was killed, Gen. John W. Nicholson, the commander of American forces in the country, said in the statement. Mr. Hasib's predecessor, Hafiz Saeed Khan, was killed in July in a United States airstrike; he had been reported dead a few times before the American military confirmed it in August.

The United States military command in Afghanistan had said that an operation on April 27 targeted Mr. Hasib. Two American Army Rangers, Sgt. Joshua Rodgers and Sgt. Cameron Thomas, were killed in the operation, perhaps by so-called friendly fire, the Pentagon has said.

Afghan and American forces often go on joint missions. The one that killed Mr. Hasib included about 50 United States Army Rangers and a similar number of Afghan special security forces, the Pentagon has said. A firefight broke out during the raid, which lasted over three hours, and American F-16 fighter jets and Apache attack helicopters carried out airstrikes to protect the troops.

The Islamic State in the Khorasan, which uses an ancient name for the region that includes Afghanistan and Pakistan, expanded rapidly in the eastern part of Afghanistan, where government forces and an intense air campaign by the United States military have tried to rout the militants. They have been reduced to about 700 fighters, down from as many as 3,000, American officials said.

Last month, the United States dropped its largest conventional bomb, the 22,000-pound MOAB, on one of the group's redoubts in Nangarhar, killing as many as 96 fighters, Afghan officials said.

Commanders decided on a ground assault, instead of another airstrike, to kill or capture Mr. Hasib because women and children were living in his compound, said an American military official who asked not to be identified when providing operational details, adding that none of them had been hurt in the raid.

Even as the militants' numbers were reduced near the eastern border with Pakistan, they claimed daring attacks in Kabul, the Afghan capital. The group's deadliest attack was a suicide bombing at a peaceful demonstration in the city last July, which killed at least 80 people.

Little is known about Mr. Hasib, a former Afghan Taliban commander who switched his loyalty to the Islamic State and took over the Afghanistan affiliate when Mr. Khan was killed. But the Afghan president's office said he was behind the March hospital attack.

President Ashraf Ghani of Afghanistan said Sunday that Abdul Hasib, the leader of the Islamic State affiliate there, was dead. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JAWAD JALALI/EUROPEAN PRESS AGENCY) 

Document NYTF000020170508ed5800037
