U.S. News: U.S. Watch

333 words
10 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

ALABAMA

Successor Named to

Sessions Senate Seat

Alabama's governor appointed Luther Strange, a Republican and the state's attorney general, to the U.S. Senate seat vacated by Jeff Sessions, who is the nation's new attorney general.

Mr. Strange was expected to be sworn in to the Senate on Thursday afternoon. His term will extend until the next Alabama senator is chosen in a special election in 2018.

Mr. Strange's appointment won't change the balance of power in the Senate, where Republicans hold a narrow 52-48 majority. But GOP leaders need to have him quickly installed, because they are still voting on many of President Donald Trump's cabinet nominees and can afford few GOP defections.

-- Kristina Peterson and Cameron McWhirter

---

Arizona

Prison Term Given in

ISIS-Inspired Attack

A federal judge on Wednesday sentenced a Phoenix man to 30 years in prison for helping to plan an Islamic State-inspired attack in Texas, a case that resulted in the first conviction of its kind won by the Justice Department.

Abdul Malik Abdul Kareem, 45 years old, was found guilty in March 2016 of five charges related to his role in plotting an attack by two gunmen on a 2015 event in Garland, Texas, that featured a cartoon-drawing contest of the Prophet Muhammad.

Both gunmen were killed in the attack, which wounded a security guard, and the Islamic State terror group claimed responsibility for the attack.

-- Dan Frosch

---

WEATHER

Snowstorm Blankets

Northeast Region

The Northeast got a snowy punch Thursday, with some areas expecting a foot or more of the white stuff, according to forecasters. At least 8 inches of snow was expected across the New York region. More than 600 flights were canceled at both Newark Liberty International Airport in New Jersey and New York City's LaGuardia, with nearly 500 flights canceled at John F. Kennedy International Airport.

-- Melanie Grayce West

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170209ed2a0001n
