World
Two U.S. Service Members Killed in Afghanistan; Pentagon says service members were killed in eastern Afghanistan battling Islamic State

By Jessica Donati in Kabul and Ben Kesling in Washington 
492 words
27 April 2017
17:32
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Two U.S. Army servicemembers were killed and another wounded during a late night operation in Afghanistan, the Pentagon said Thursday, following the death of an American soldier there earlier this month.

The U.S. military has escalated its engagement in the country since the Trump administration took office in January, increasing airstrikes against the Taliban and Islamic State and more frequently sending out soldiers on operations with their Afghan counterparts.

Further details surrounding their deaths weren't immediately known. An official with the international military coalition in the country said the soldiers were Army Rangers.

The two "were killed in action last night in southern Nangarhar, Afghanistan, during an operation against ISIS Khorasan," Pentagon spokesman Capt. Jeff Davis said in a statement, referring to Islamic State's affiliate in the country. "Their identities, service, and unit affiliations are being withheld pending next of kin notification."

The latest deaths come as the White House debates the U.S. military's request for more troops to fight resurgent Taliban and Islamic State threats in Afghanistan.

U.S. Defense Secretary Jim Mattis was in the capital Kabul Monday to discuss the troop request. A number of the Afghan military's top officials, including defense minister Abdullah Habibi and army chief of staff Qadam Shah Shahim, resigned that day in the wake of the deadliest Taliban attack since 2001.

Taliban militants toting machine guns and explosives had on Friday gained access to the Afghan army's northern headquarters, massacring at least 170 of its soldiers. The government only admitted the scale of the disaster after details were leaked to the media over the weekend.

The Afghan government has denied allegations by critics, including coalition officials, that its military is in a state of disarray on the cusp of the Taliban's annual spring offensive—hen fighting and attacks usually increase. Afghan officials called Monday's resignations part of a continuing reform program.

President Donald Trump's administration has yet to announce an official policy for Afghanistan, but Afghan officials and their coalition counterparts widely expect him to send more troops to the country, which has been at war for almost four decades.

Gen. Nicholson, the top U.S. military commander in Afghanistan, earlier this month took advantage of the U.S. military's greater freedom in the country to drop the U.S.'s second-largest nonnuclear weapon on Islamic State fighters in its east, the first time the munition has ever been used in combat.

Afghan officials claim the strike killed scores of fighters. But coalition officials say it may have been ineffective, as the area remains insecure and fighting continues around the site.

Write to Jessica Donati at Jessica.Donati@wsj.com and Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170427ed4r004mq
