World; Europe
Cousin of Brussels Bombers Is Charged With Ties to Terrorist Network

By MILAN SCHREUER 
470 words
3 June 2017
02:28
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

PARIS —he police in Belgium have charged a cousin of the brothers who set off suicide bombs in Brussels in March 2016 with being part of the terrorist network that planned and carried out those attacks and the attacks in Paris in November 2015.

The Belgian federal prosecutor’ office released a statement on Friday saying that the suspect, Yassine Atar, 30, had been charged with “errorist assassinations”nd “articipation as a leader in the activities of a terrorist group.”

Mr. Atar, a Belgian of Moroccan ancestry, has been in custody since last year, on suspicion of planning an attack against a “arch against fear”n the aftermath of the Brussels bombings, according to his lawyer, Séastien Courtoy. The march, which was to be held in central Brussels in March 2016, was canceled after the police overheard telephone conversations in which Mr. Atar took part, the authorities said.

Nitrogen, an ingredient that has been used in making bombs, was found on Mr. Atar’ hair and his beard, according to Mr. Courtoy. The hair samples were sent to a forensic lab. An  arson fire there last August possibly destroyed all the samples, according to the lab’ director.

Mr. Courtoy has demanded that prosecutors produce evidence against his client and has denied the charges. But over the past year, according to police documents, the police have been piecing together Mr. Atar’ role in the network. He is a cousin of the brothers Ibrahim and Khalid el-Bakraoui, who on March 22, 2016, carried out the Brussels attacks by setting off suicide bombs at an airport and in a subway station.

The attacks killed 32 people and wounded 340. Mr. Atar was also found to have had keys to an apartment on the Rue Henri Bergé6 in Brussels, which was used by the network to prepare bombs for the Brussels assaults, and possibly the Paris attacks.

In that apartment the police found the DNA of eight people suspected of involvement in the Paris and Brussels attacks —ll of them now either dead or in jail. The apartment also contained bomb-making material, traces of TATP (the substance used in the Paris and the Brussels attacks), numerous cellphones and documents, police files show.

The Belgian authorities suspect that a brother of Mr. Atar, Oussama Atar, was a leader of the Brussels network. Oussama Atar remains at large.

* Brussels Commemorates Attack Anniversary With Both Silence and Noise

* Strikes Claimed by \b ISIS\b0  Shut Brussels and Shake European Security

* Brussels Attacks Underscore Vulnerability of an Open European Society

Police officers searched a building in Brussels on March 22, 2016, the day bombings in the city killed more than 30 people. | Patrik Stollarz/Agence France-Presse —etty Images 

Document NYTFEED020170603ed630008d
