World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,213 words
31 August 2017
12:34
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Trail of Destruction

The devastation from Harvey, recently downgraded to a tropical depression, continues to mount. Industrial chemicals manufacturer Arkema said early Thursday it had been notified of two explosions and black smoke coming from its Crosby, Texas, plant—ocated some 25 miles northeast of Houston—hat are believed to be a result of the epic flooding. The effects of crippled Gulf Coast refineries, ports and pipelines are being felt across the U.S. and even globally, a result of a domestic energy boom that has made the world increasingly reliant on Texas. Harvey shut a third Gulf Coast refining center Wednesday, while port closings are compounding the refineries' woes. The death toll in Texas has risen to at least 29. Harvey could cause some $10 billion in damage to infrastructure in the Houston area and businesses might also lose as much as $10 billion in economic output. Texas Gov. Greg Abbott forecast federal funding needs "far in excess" of $125 billion, topping those related to Hurricane Katrina. We report that for Katrina evacuees who settled in Houston, enduring Harvey has been like reliving a nightmare—ringing to the surface a familiar terror, as well as hard-won experience.

Cadillac Dreams

Among the world's booming premium-car companies, the brand enjoying the biggest surge is one many U.S. consumers long passed by. Cadillac is selling at its fastest clip since the Reagan years—hanks to the Chinese who see it as an American status symbol. In China—he world's biggest auto market, where one of every four sales occur—Cadillac sold 69% more vehicles in the first seven months of 2017 than a year ago. It was the first time Cadillac sold more vehicles abroad than at home. One issue for parent General Motors has been that executives—rustrated by Cadillac's years of U.S. slippage and failure to gain traction in Europe—aven't invested in their luxury brand with the same gusto as rivals such as Daimler and BMW. The recent success in China is starting to change the equation.

Russia Intrigue

Former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort's overseas political work involved a notable patron: a Russian oligarch. Mr. Manafort's political-consulting firm was active for more than a decade doing work that often dovetailed with Russian political interests not only in Ukraine, but also in Georgia and Montenegro. These efforts often involved one principal figure, Oleg Deripaska, a politically connected international operator whose ventures have sometimes aligned with Russian President Vladimir Putin's foreign-policy objectives. The link helps explain why Mr. Manafort is of such interest to investigators probing alleged Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. Mr. Deripaska has offered to give testimony to the House and Senate intelligence committees in exchange for immunity, but congressional officials have rejected the offer, not wanting to interfere with the FBI's own Russia inquiry.

High Times, Low Prices

After decades of dodging law enforcement and fighting for legalization, U.S. marijuana growers face a new challenge: depressed prices. From Washington state to Colorado, wholesale cannabis prices have tumbled as dozens of states legalized the drug for recreational and medicinal uses, seeding a boom in marijuana production. The market is still tiny compared with the U.S. tobacco industry's $119 billion in annual retail sales, but the nascent cannabis business has grown to more than $6 billion a year at retail. For marijuana smokers, the price drop is sweet news. But for growers—anging from high-tech warehouse operations to backcountry pot farmers gone legit—he price drop has been painful. In response, some producers are taking a page from the food industry, where farmers and food companies increasingly appeal to health- and environment-conscious consumers.

Today's Video

Storm for the Ages

Harvey's impact on Texas has been catastrophic, with Houston faring worse than some other cities struck by hurricanes or tropical storms. Here's the science of why Harvey has been especially devastating for the area.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

A Provocative Look at the Harm From Corporate Heft

Trump Urges Bipartisan Support for Corporate Tax Cut, Code Simplification

WORLD

U.S. Delivers Airstrike to Block Relocation of \b ISIS\b0  Fighters From Lebanese-Syrian Border

Japan to Beef Up Missile Defense After North Korea Test Launches

BUSINESS

Disney to Cut Staff at ABC Television Group

New Uber CEO Says Company Could Go Public in 18 Months

MARKETS

New Worry in 'Repo': Just One Bank for $3.5 Trillion Market

1MDB Pays Balance of Missed Debt Installment to Abu Dhabi Fund

Number of the Day

$475,000

The price of Novartis's first-of-its-kind cancer therapy, which was approved by the FDA on Wednesday. The treatment, named Kymriah, has been shown to increase the chances of survival for children and young people with an aggressive form of leukemia who don't respond to standard treatment.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on Mr. Manafort's link to a Russian oligarch? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on parents allowing their children to skip school for family travel, Richard Saloom of Alabama said: "I think missing school for truly educational events, that cannot be done outside of the school year, is fine. It should be done with the school's permission. To go on a family outing is not appropriate. The kids have to understand that attending school is a responsibility and not an option. School attendance to some degree is a training process for the workplace—ou can't miss days at a whim." Doris Russ of Pennsylvania shared: "As a teacher, I've been the recipient of that extra work imposed by students taking vacations during school time. It can be a nightmare. I have to give the student the same number of days to make up the work as he missed. I have to reschedule and correct every homework, quiz and test, find the time to tutor him outside of class, and meet his parents' expectations that he will miss nothing, all the while continuing with regular classes that have moved on. For multiple children missing different time periods." And Jim Pierce of Texas opined: "There is one word for it: selfish. Such travel puts the child at a disadvantage and greatly inconveniences America's greatest underappreciated asset, its teachers."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170831ed8v0012x
