World News:  ISIS  Hits Iraqi City It Lost

By Tamer El-Ghobashy in Erbil, Iraq, and Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad 
422 words
6 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An overnight attack by Islamic State gunmen and suicide bombers disguised as police officers killed at least 35 people and wounded 40 others in the Iraqi city of Tikrit, officials said Wednesday.

The episode underlines the security challenge faced by Iraq's government even after it reclaims cities like Tikrit from the militants, who have proven capable of staging deadly attacks even in territory no longer under their control.

Tikrit was reclaimed from the group by the Iraqi military and allied militias in 2015, and has since been touted by both Iraqi and American officials as a model for repopulating, rebuilding and securing areas once held by Islamic State.

The gunmen were waved through a security checkpoint because they were wearing police uniforms, said provincial council member Mounir Hussein. They headed to the city's crowded Zuhour Street shopping district at about 10 p.m., killing four police officers before turning their weapons on civilians.

At least two Islamic State gunmen exploded suicide belts they were wearing, Mr. Hussein said. Three other militants were killed by responding police.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack.

Its scale indicates the militant group could still maintain cells within cities lost to government forces, and is increasingly falling back on traditional guerrilla-style terror tactics as it adapts to the loss of its power centers.

Iraqi forces have since October been engaged in a fierce battle to expel Islamic State from Mosul, the extremists' remaining urban stronghold in the country.

Iraqi officials estimate they have reclaimed some 75% of the city. Holding reclaimed ground and preventing security breaches have been key concerns for the Iraqi government as it continues to win back cities from Islamic State.

Recent attacks on such territory -- including suicide bombings in Fallujah since last summer, when it was declared liberated -- have raised questions from lawmakers about whether Islamic State is taking advantage of corruption among security officials to breach checkpoints.

Mr. Hussein said the attackers in Tikrit identified a weakness at some checkpoints: police officers waving through anyone wearing a military or police uniform without properly checking their identity.

Iraqi officers do a thorough job checking civilians and should apply the same standards to people in uniform, he added.

"Once they see someone in uniform, they relax and never check," he said. "This is something being used by terrorists to breach security lines."