Politics
Donald Trump Gets Rare Bipartisan Backing for Syria Strike; Republicans are enthusiastic and Democrats support move, though some question whether Congress was consulted

By Reid J. Epstein And Janet Hook 
1,099 words
8 April 2017
01:29
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—or the first time since his inauguration, Donald Trump is being treated like a conventional president.

Mr. Trump's ordering of a missile strike on a Syrian air base that his administration says launched a chemical attack this week drew enthusiastic support from across the GOP spectrum and tempered praise from most Democrats.

The political reaction to Mr. Trump's military intervention against Syria marks a dramatic change from the resistance the president has faced from Democrats and skepticism from some Republicans since he assumed office in January.

"In the short run, this will clearly benefit him politically," said Karl Rove, the top political aide to President George W. Bush. "It will cause people to look at him differently, and it will cause our adversaries to see us differently."

The airstrikes Mr. Trump ordered on Syria transformed his profile, at least for now, from a president whose skepticism about foreign interventions was at odds with GOP orthodoxy, into a more conventional foreign-policy figure in the mainstream of his party.

GOP hawks such as Sens. John McCain, Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio had been skeptical of Mr. Trump's foreign-policy leadership. Their allies said the Syria response would help him gain credibility and rally support behind his beleaguered presidency.

Even Bill Kristol, a conservative commentator who has been a relentless critic of Mr. Trump, said the move seemed to be well executed and in keeping with what other GOP presidents would do. "If you thought this White House looks like total chaos and craziness, you can say, ‘ee, at least in this instance it looks like it's functioning,' " he said.

Mr. Kristol and other Trump critics said they were unsure how long the moment of leadership or the policy behind it would last, given Mr. Trump's record of inconsistency.

"Is this the moment where he is perceived as serious and steady, and has he made this transition?" asked Brian Katulis, an official in President Bill Clinton's administration who is a senior fellow at the liberal Center for American Progress. "Quite frankly, we don't know, and experience shows he is likely to revert to true to form, erratic and mercurial."

Still, Aaron David Miller, a Middle East expert at the Wilson Center and former adviser to Republican and Democratic secretaries of state, said that this was a "clarifying moment" for the Trump presidency, unlike any other in the first rocky, polarizing months of his time in the White House.

"He's created a moment we have not seen in the first 70 days. There is a recognition that something important has happened, something that can be described as bipartisan," he said. "It's a moment. It's not guaranteed to last, given the challenges that remain."

Democrats who have stridently opposed Mr. Trump's agenda praised the airstrikes.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York called it "the right thing to do." Sen. Dianne Feinstein of California called the military response "a limited, and I think an important strike, and it accomplished its purpose and sent a message."

Democratic National Committee Chairman Tom Perez, who has harshly criticized Mr. Trump in recent weeks, didn't denounce the attack on Syria, but raised the issue of whether Mr. Trump had consulted Congress. "Americans deserve to know Trump's broader strategy and whether or not it includes diplomacy. Congress should be consulted," he said.

Large numbers of Republicans have reversed their position on congressional approval for Syrian airstrikes since then-President Barack Obama weighed attacking the country in 2013.

At the time, Republicans such as then-House Speaker John Boehner insisted Mr. Obama lay out a fuller plan for action in Syria before launching airstrikes after the Assad regime carried out a suspected chemical attack in Damascus. Scores of Republicans said they would oppose an authorization for the use of military force. No vote was taken.

Now, many of those same Republicans praised Mr. Trump for taking action.

"This action in Syria was appropriate and just," said House Speaker Paul Ryan, who opposed Mr. Obama's 2013 Syria plan. Utah Sen. Orrin Hatch also praised Mr. Trump's action, though in 2013 he said he had "strong reservations" about authorizing force against Syria.

How much patience Democrats have with Mr. Trump as leader of an intervening America remains unclear. Mr. Rove said Mr. Trump would lose any newfound political goodwill if he didn't articulate his foreign-policy philosophy "within days."

Mr. Trump drew condemnation from his most strident nationalist supporters, who accused him of going back on his campaign promise to put "America first" and avoid Middle East conflict except to stop terror acts against the U.S.

"He told us he would be the president of America, not ‘he world,' " Ann Coulter wrote on Twitter.

Mr. Trump's airstrikes on Syria also have had the effect of unifying anti-interventionist elements on the political far left and far right.

Sen. Rand Paul (R., Ky.) said the airstrikes are "illegal, and they're unconstitutional." Rep. Barbara Lee (D., Calif.), the lone member of Congress to vote against the post-9/11 authorization to use force against Afghanistan, said the airstrikes represent "a dangerous military escalation into the Syrian civil war and are without legal justification."

The airstrikes were also disappointing to Republicans who had hoped Mr. Trump would, as he had promised during his campaign, shift U.S. policy away from nation-building and military actions not driven by pressing national security concerns.

"I think it's a disaster," said A.J. Spiker, former chairman of the Iowa Republican Party. "It makes people question: If a photo of an incident that has occurred in another nation causes the president to drop 50 or more cruise missiles, is that a real well thought-out strategy, or is this an emotional reaction?"

Siobhan Hughes and Natalie Andrews contributed to this article.

Write to Reid J. Epstein at Reid.Epstein@wsj.com and Janet Hook at janet.hook@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base

* Syria Says Strike Kills 16, Damages Air Base

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule

* Trump Shows He Is Willing to Act Forcefully, Quickly

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700bcd
