World; Middle East
Iran Joins Russia in Denouncing U.S. Strike on Syria, but Stops There

By THOMAS ERDBRINK 
982 words
10 April 2017
23:13
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

TEHRAN —he punitive American missile strike on  Syria for the chemical weapons attack a week ago brought Syria’ most important backers, Russia and Iran, publicly closer together —hether the Iranians want to be or not.

Far from accepting the Trump administration’ version of the chemical weapons assault, the Iranians joined the Russians in rejecting it and doubling down on their expressions of support for President Bashar al-Assad of Syria.

Nonetheless, Iran and Russia do not see eye to eye on everything in a relationship shaped by mistrust, a legacy of Iranian resentment of Russia’ historical expansionism and Soviet-era attempts at domination.

Iranian political analysts say there has been no sign that Iran is prepared to take one key step on Syria: granting Russia’ air force full access to Iranian air bases. Such a move would greatly increase Russia’ firepower and maneuvering space in Syria, and it would pose a new challenge for United States aircraft in the region.

It is impossible to know what Iranian leaders really think about who was responsible for the deadly chemical weapons assault last Tuesday in the northern Syrian town of Khan Sheikhoun, which the United States says was carried out by Syrian warplanes. As victims of such attacks during the Iran-Iraq war, the Iranians like to assert their moral authority on that subject, and they might be expected to be furious with Mr. Assad.

But like Russia, Iranian leaders are increasingly embedded with Mr. Assad, seeing him as a vital strategic ally after more than six years of defending his government in Syria’ war. They also do not want to see a greater military entanglement with the United States.

So in their public reaction to the retaliatory American missile strike early Friday in Syria, Iranian leaders have done little except condemn it and join Russia in calling for an international investigation. And like Russia, they suggested that terrorist groups —s they call Mr. Assad’ opponents —ad used chemical weapons on their own people to provoke a strike by the United States.

On Monday, Russia’ Foreign Ministry said in a statement that the American missile strike was an aggressive act against a sovereign state and violated international law. The statement was issued after a telephone call between Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov of Russia and his Iranian counterpart, Mohammad Javad Zarif.

But Iranian political analysts knowledgeable about government thinking are also interpreting the missile strike as only a symbolic show of force by Mr. Trump, who often portrayed President Barack Obama as indecisive on Syria.

“rump wants to flex his muscles and show that he is different from Obama,”aid Farshad Ghorbanpour, an analyst close to President Hassan Rouhani of Iran. “ut we don’ think he will continue bombing in Syria. This is just a knee-jerk reaction.”

On his Twitter account, Mr. Zarif compared the strike to the fallacious case made by the George W. Bush administration in 2003 that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and therefore needed to be attacked.

US aids Saddam's use of CW against Iran in 80's; then resorts to military force over bogus CW allegations: 1st in 2003 and now in Syria. 2/3 —avad Zarif (@JZarif) April 7, 2017

On Sunday, Mr. Zarif posted an image of a Foreign Ministry document concluding that “xtremist organizations, particularly al-Nusra and ISIS,”re the only ones possessing chemical weapons.

Not only have those groups used such weapons in Syria and Iraq before, the document said, but “hey had a clear —nd desperate —otive to use them, given that the tragedy in Khan Sheikhoun took place only days after the Trump administration publicly abandoned the U.S. policy of regime change in Syria.”

Using satellite tracking and other surveillance tools, the Pentagon said it had concluded that Syrian warplanes dumped outlawed chemical bombs most likely containing sarin nerve agent on Khan Sheikhoun. Acting on Mr. Trump’ orders, American warships launched Tomahawk missiles that struck the Al Shayrat airfield, where the warplanes were based —he first direct attack on Mr. Assad’ forces by the United States since the war began.

Russia responded by suspending an agreement with the United States aimed at preventing accidental encounters between the two in aircraft missions over Syria. The missile strike also presented Iran with an opportunity to give Russia more latitude in using Iranian bases. The Iranians conspicuously said nothing about it.

Russia flies some planes out of airports in government-controlled Syria, but its long-range bombers operate out of Russia, a disadvantage that has limited its abilities to strike Mr. Assad’ opponents.

“henever we deem it necessary, we will give them the use of our air bases,”aid Hamidreza Taraghi, a hard-line political analyst who has close relations with Iran’ highest leaders. Iran has occasionally been granting Russia access to the Shahid Nojeh air base in Hamadan, but not unlimited use.

When Russia announced last year that it had been using the Iranian base, becoming the first foreign power since the 1979 Islamic Revolution to have a military presence in Iran, Iranian hard-liners objected on what was clearly a sensitive issue for them.

Iranians say Russia has often betrayed their country in their long history together. Use of the base is now decided case by case.

It remains unclear at best whether that will change, bringing the countries closer together and dragging them even deeper into the Syrian war.

“e are growing closer and closer to the Russians in our cooperation in fighting terrorism,”r. Taraghi said. “hat’ all I can say.”

Iranian worshipers chanting anti-American slogans during a prayer ceremony at the University of Tehran campus on Friday. | Vahid Salemi/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170410ed4a007vd
