
Opinion
After Victory in Mosul; How the U.S. and Iraq can prevent  ISIS  from rising again.

By the Editorial Board 
631 words
12 July 2017
16:14
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi declared victory Monday over Islamic State in Mosul, and Americans can also take pride at the end of a bloody three-year campaign that would not have happened without U.S. leadership and arms. The triumph will be short-lived, however, if the Baghdad government and U.S. repeat the mistakes they made after the successful "surge" of 2007-2008.

The victory removes ISIS from the capital of the self-styled caliphate that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi declared after routing the Iraqi army in Mosul in June 2014. It provides relief to tens of thousands of Iraqis living in fear of torture or death for even minor offenses against Shariah law, or for being a non-Muslim.

It is also a morale boost to the Iraqi military and Mr. Abadi, who has proven to be a major improvement over predecessor Nouri al-Maliki. Particular credit goes to the Kurdish peshmerga who were the main resistance to Islamic State in 2014 and prevented a larger rout.

The biggest problem with the Mosul campaign is that it took so long. Barack Obama never wanted to admit that his 2011 withdrawal of all U.S. forces was a blunder that required a U.S. military return to Iraq. He thus deployed a light footprint limited mainly to special forces and air power. New Defense Secretary Jim Mattis accelerated the pace of battle after January. But the ability of ISIS to survive in Mosul for so long gave it an elan in the Islamic world that helped recruit young radicals and spread its brand around the world.

Defeat in Mosul diminishes that appeal, a decline that will continue as the U.S. coalition closes in on Islamic State's Syrian stronghold in Raqqa. But the threat won't vanish, as the jihadists disperse into smaller cells in towns and cities across the Sunni heartland. The jihadists will return to their post-Saddam insurgent tactics and wait to exploit bad governance or more sectarian conflict.

"We have another mission ahead of us, to create stability, to build and clear Daesh [ISIS] cells, and that requires an intelligence and security effort, and the unity which enabled us to fight Daesh," Mr. Abadi said Monday, and we hope he means it.

He could start by declaring his support for local Sunni government and preventing Iran-backed Shiite militias from treating Sunnis like members of Islamic State as they go door to door in Mosul. He needs to rebuild Mosul rapidly and more effectively than his government has Fallujah and other former ISIS-run cities. (See Seth Jones nearby.)

The Trump Administration can help by negotiating a modest U.S. military presence that will remain in Iraq for the long run. Mr. Mattis told the Senate in June that such a force could serve "in a training role and mentoring role in Iraq if we work that out with the government." A U.S. presence will serve as a moderating voice among the Sunni, Shiite and Kurdish factions. And it may give Mr. Abadi more courage to resist becoming a de facto subsidiary of Iran and its Hezbollah-like militias in Iraq.

This will be crucial as September's Kurdish independence referendum approaches, which may threaten the Abadi government. Iran would love a fractured and diminished Baghdad to replace Mr. Abadi with an ally like Mr. Maliki. A politically stable and independent Iraq, by contrast, would improve the chances of stabilizing Syria after ISIS is swept from Raqqa. There are no permanent victories in the Middle East, but the liberation of Mosul is an important milestone in the war against radical Islam.

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b0073o
