World
Islamic State Attack on Rebel Base in Syria Sparks Rare, Close Battle; U.S.-backed Syrian fighters and American forces clash with militants inside the base

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington and Noam Raydan in Beirut 
1,020 words
11 April 2017
01:49
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After President Donald Trump ordered last week's airstrike against an Assad regime airfield, dozens of U.S. special operations forces in southern Syria left their small base to avoid possible retaliatory action, according to American-backed Syrian fighters and U.S. officials.

Then came the attack, but not from President Bashar al-Assad's military.

On Saturday, Islamic State extremists disguised as U.S.-backed rebels detonated a massive car bomb at the base entrance, a blast that allowed some of the militants to fight their way inside, Syrian fighters and American officials said on Monday.

Islamic State fighters wore uniforms similar to those used by the U.S.-backed rebels. Some had U.S.-made M-16s and vehicles they had seized from American-backed rebels in a previous battle.

As the fight intensified, U.S. special operations forces and their Syrian rebel partners who had taken up positions in a desert no-man's-land rushed back to the base to help repel the attack, which lasted for about three hours. Pilots with the U.S.-led military coalition battling Islamic State carried out airstrike after airstrike to repel the fighters.

While no Americans were killed or injured, the attack was a sign of the increasing risks U.S. forces face as the Trump administration sends more troops into Syria to help with the intensifying campaign to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, the extremist group's de facto capital.

"It was a serious fight," one U.S. military official said Monday as new details emerged about the rare close-quarters fight between Americans and Islamic State extremists. "It was a coordinated, complex attack. Whether or not it was a one-off, we will have to see."

The U.S. military trains Syrian rebels at al-Tanf, a small base close to the Jordanian border. U.S. forces have been beefing up their presence in southern Syria as part of the broader campaign against Islamic State, U.S. officials said.

Last week, after the U.S. cruise-missile strike on an Assad regime airfield believed to be home to Syrian pilots who carried out a suspected chemical weapons attack, U.S. forces pulled out of al-Tanf as they watched for a possible retaliatory strike by Syria or Russia, which works side-by-side with Mr. Assad's forces.

"Around 20 ISIS fighters attacked the base, and suicide bombers blew up the main gate, and clashes took place inside the base," said Tlass al-Salama, commander of the Osoud al Sharqiya Army, part of the U.S.-backed moderate rebel alliance.

As the attack intensified, U.S. forces had to fight their way back to the base.

"It was a close-in fight," said the U.S. official.

Members of Mr. Salama's force rushed to provide reinforcements, but came under attack as they tried to reach the base, he said. Two of his fighters were killed.

"We dispatched around six or seven vehicles but [ISIS] attacked us," Mr. Salama said. "They targeted the first vehicle in the convoy."

The decision to leave al-Tanf was one of several steps the American military took in Syria in the aftermath of the U.S.'s first intentional strike against Mr. Assad's forces.

The U.S.-led coalition scaled back airstrikes in Syria amid fears that Russia or Syria might try to shoot down American pilots. Officials at U.S. Central Command, which oversees the campaign against Islamic State, said it had temporarily curtailed offensive airstrikes and expected to soon return to normal operations.

On Monday, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis said last Thursday's U.S. strike on Shayrat airfield had delivered a blow to Mr. Assad's air force. The strikes hit air defense systems, fuel depots and ammunition sites.

But the missiles didn't hit the runway, which allowed Syrian and Russian pilots to use it soon after the U.S. strike. Mr. Mattis said the strike took out 20 Syrian planes, or 20% of Mr. Assad's operational air force. That figure couldn't be independently verified and some analysts said it might overstate the impact.

"The Syrian government has lost the ability to refuel or rearm aircraft at Shayrat airfield and at this point, use of the runway is of idle military interest," Mr. Mattis said in a statement. "The Syrian government would be ill-advised ever again to use chemical weapons."

One senior U.S. official characterized the strike as more modest. "It was a symbolic strike," the official said.

U.S. officials have been working to determine what role, if any, Russian forces may have played in the Syrian chemical weapons attack, which killed at least 89 people and triggered the swift U.S. military response.

American officials say a Syrian pilot dropped a single bomb filled with some banned chemical—ossibly sarin—n Khan Sheikhoun, a village in northwestern Syria. Syria has denied using chemical weapons in the attack.

On Monday, the senior U.S. official said the U.S. military now believes a Russian drone flew overhead after the attack, a demonstration of Moscow's role that day. The drone flew over a makeshift rebel hospital, which was then targeted by a Russian-made jet, U.S. officials said.

It still isn't clear if a Russian or Syrian plane carried out the second attack, which U.S. officials said may have been an attempt to destroy evidence of the chemical-weapons use.

Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut contributed to this article.

Write to Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State Hits U.S.-Led Base in Southern Syria

* U.S. Strike in Syria Raises Tensions With Iran

* Trump's Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Rebels Hail U.S. Strike, Syria Says 16 Killed

* U.S. Launches Cruise Missiles at Syrian Air Base in Response to Chemical Attack

Document WSJO000020170410ed4a00a19
