Briefing
H.R. McMaster, Mike Pence, Vitaly Churkin: Your Tuesday Briefing

By SEAN ALFANO 
1,308 words
21 February 2017
11:46
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•rump appoints new national security adviser.

President Trump announced on Monday that Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster would be his new national security adviser, replacing Michael T. Flynn, who was asked to resign after he misled officials about contacts with Russia’ ambassador.

General McMaster is widely respected and is credited with helping to turn around the Iraq war.

His selection followed a report in The Times about two of Mr. Trump’ associates working on a peace plan for Ukraine and Russia. They have no experience in foreign policy, and their “iplomatic freelancing”nfuriated Ukrainian officials.

•aking on a foe of political unity.

If East Stratcom sounds like a group tasked with devising plans to win wars, that’ not far-off. The 11-member team is serving as Europe’ front line against fake news.

Separately, Mr. Trump  claimed that Sweden was experiencing a crisis because of immigration. During a rally over the weekend, he suggested that a terrorist attack had occurred there the night before. Swedish officials were baffled.

•umpy recess for Congress.

Some lawmakers are holding town hall-style meetings with their constituents over the break, providing a testing ground of political divisions.

The events, which have been contentious at times during discussions of the Affordable Care Act, may signal how much latitude voters will give to defenders of the president.

Our reporters will be covering four town hall meetings today, including one by Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa.

•reeding ground for ISIS.

Trinidad and Tobago is scrambling to stop young Muslims from going to Syria to take up arms for the Islamic State.

Per capita, the Caribbean island nation has the largest number of foreign fighters from the Western Hemisphere who have joined the militant group, the former U.S. ambassador there said.

•he Daily, your audio news report.

The source of recent government leaks could define this new presidency as much as the president himself.

Listen from a computer, on an iOS device or on an Android device.

Business

•here were 2,473 billionaires in 2015, 6.4 percent more than a year earlier, by a new count. The top 10 —ine from the U.S., one from Spain —ave a combined net worth of $582 billion.

•litism is alive in Britain, and it’ not just over accents: A new report points to pay disparities linked to class.

•“he Lego Batman Movie”gain topped the North American box office, while “The Great Wall”ad a disappointing showing.

•.S. markets were closed for Presidents’ay. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Over the holiday weekend

•illions of people in South Sudan are in urgent need of food, the U.N. warned, citing the country’ war and collapsing economy as reasons for the famine.

“ur worst fears have been realized,”n official said.

•ice President Mike Pence was in Brussels on Monday, and he tried to reassure the European Union of American support.

•orma McCorvey, the anonymous plaintiff in Roe v. Wade, died in Texas at age 69. The landmark 1973 Supreme Court ruling that legalized abortion in the U.S. also reshaped the nation’ social and political landscapes.

•italy I. Churkin, the Russian ambassador to the United Nations known for his caustic, dry wit, died at work on Monday. He was 64.

Smarter Living

•e’e in Week 4 of our New Year’ resolutions month, helping you stick to your goals. There’ still time to join.

Whether you recommitted to a resolution or started a new one, you may be wavering —nd that’ O.K.! What’ most important is forgiving yourself for slip-ups and getting back to it.

So we’e giving you permission to move on. Research suggests that “iving ourselves a break and accepting our imperfections may be the first step toward better health.”

If you’e gotten off track, tell us what happened.

•ecipe of the day: Like bacon, egg and cheese sandwiches? You’l love breakfast carbonara.

Noteworthy

•he death of Malcolm X.

The civil rights leader was killed on this day in 1965 at a rally in New York City. Hear from a witness and visit the site of the assassination in our latest 360 video.

•ise of Alex Jones.

Mr. Jones “s the conspiracy-theorizing, flame-throwing nationalistic radio and internet star,”nd an occasional source and validator for the president, our media columnist writes.

But in his early years as a broadcaster, he is said to have worked out of a spare bedroom “ith choo-choo wallpaper.”

•ow well do we know the cosmos?

A crisis may be brewing: The universe seems to be expanding too fast, some astronomers say.

•est of late-night TV.

Most hosts took a break for the holiday, but Stephen Colbert and Seth Meyers spent it roasting the president.

Back Story

Today the U.N. is celebrating International Mother Language Day. Started in 2000, it is a day to celebrate linguistic diversity and draw attention to endangered and defunct languages.

An event 65 years ago this week was the inspiration. Students in Dhaka —hen the capital of East Pakistan, now Bangladesh —emanded that the government designate Bengali as an official language. Violence broke out, and the police opened fire on the demonstrators, killing at least six, according to an article in The Times in 1952.

There are around 3,000 endangered languages, some of them dialects, according to an estimate by the U.N.’ cultural body, Unesco. Extinction occurs when the last known speaker dies. That was the case when Alban Michael, a speaker of a dialect of Nuu-chah-nulth in British Columbia, Canada, died last year. Vancouver Island, where Mr. Michael lived, is particularly rich in dialects.

Multilingual education is the focus of International Mother Language Day this year. “ducation and information in the mother language is absolutely essential to improving learning and developing confidence and self-esteem,”he director-general of Unesco said.

A Twitter post last week by Unesco was even more emphatic: “Languages are who we are. Protecting this identity is a matter of human rights!”

Palko Karasz and Sandra E. Garcia contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

“e’ a man of tremendous talent and tremendous experience,”resident Trump said of Lt. Gen. H.R. McMaster, left, his new national security adviser. | Al Drago/The New York Times | Senator Tim Scott, left, and Representative Mark Sanford, right, both Republicans, on Saturday at a town hall meeting in Mount Pleasant, S.C. | Sean Rayford for The New York Times | The famine in South Sudan has affected a relatively small area in the northern part of the country, where the conflict between the government and rebel groups has been most intense. | Siegfried Modola/Reuters | Alex Jones, right, said that his audience is “he teeth of the Trump organization on the ground —he information-warfare, organic internal resistance.” Ilana Panich-Linsman for The New York Times | A rally for International Mother Language Day in Dhaka, Bangladesh, on Monday. | Abir Abdullah/European Pressphoto Agency | The civil rights leader Malcolm X was killed Feb. 21, 1965, at a rally in New York City. Hear from a witness and visit the site of the assassination —n the past, present and in 360 video. | By BAYETÉOSS SMITH 

Document NYTFEED020170221ed2l001p5
