Magazine
The Magazine’ Money Issue

By BILL WASIK 
764 words
4 May 2017
11:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

Money, it’ said, makes the world go round. While that might not be literally true —arth, much like its wealthiest inhabitants, moves forward through sheer inertia, a kinetic inheritance bestowed at its creation —oney undeniably does make things go around the world. An astonishing number of things, in fact: The weight of goods moved by ship alone each year now surpasses 10 billion tons, or nearly 3,000 pounds of stuff for every human being on the planet. (Or if you prefer, imagine it as 27,000 Empire State Buildings, or 15 times the weight of all the cows on Earth.) The estimated annual value of global trade since 1979 has increased tenfold, to more than $16 trillion, a figure nearly equivalent to the entire G.D.P. of the United States.

The consequences of all this global exchange have been profound, and not merely in an economic sense. Trade may not have made the world “mall”if anything, it feels more capacious and complex than ever) or “lat”its relative economic opportunities and its physical form both remain irreducibly three-dimensional, whatever Tom Friedman or Kyrie Irving might tell you), but our hyperglobalized economy has certainly made the world strange, as the interconnections of capital have brought about other, unforeseen types of connection. Smartphones, designed largely in California and manufactured almost entirely in Asia, proliferate only thanks to conflict minerals mined largely (and often brutally) in Africa. Recently a dispute over South Korea’ missile-defense system prompted China to retaliate against Korea’ exports of pop music and soap operas, which have become wildly popular with Chinese consumers. The propagandists of ISIS use American meme generators to lure potential fighters from Europe and elsewhere. Money pulls soccer talent from the developing world’ farms and slums and sends it across the developed world, creating unlikely national heroes in the process.

This week’ Money Issue tries to capture some of that intense interdependence, gathering a collection of stories in which global trade —or good and ill —as forged surprising links among nations. In Namibia, an extraordinary influx of investment from China, now unquestionably the world’ expansionist superpower, has utterly transformed local economies and communities. In Chile, Korea’ infectious pop music has found an unusual foothold. The harvesters of the once-obscure açíerry in Brazil have had their livelihoods improved but also complicated by a surge of demand in the United States.

If a common theme emerges from these pages, it is that politicians, in trying to enrich their citizens or themselves, can steer the flows —ut only to a point. Alabama’ tax breaks have helped import hundreds of airplane-industry jobs from Europe, even as similar tax breaks by Britain and Canada have exploded Hollywood’ visual-effects industry. Tens of thousands of Filipino caregivers have gone to Israel to tend to its aging population, but the contortions of ideology have kept them from being entirely welcomed.

This issue arrives at a moment when a new class of political leader, in Europe and the United States, has arisen to denounce the effects of trade —nd to demand that the world’ nations become more distinct, its alliances wind down, its weird ties unbind. But if the promiscuous connections of global capitalism have made the planet more strange, they have helped forge a real acquaintance among peoples who once were strangers, by making the handiwork of each more familiar and legible to the other. The new nationalists may try to stanch the flow of goods (through tariffs and tax policy) and jobs (by backing out of international trade agreements) and workers (through draconian restrictions in migration). But they will be hard pressed to stanch the impulse among their citizens, one born of curiosity and acquisitiveness, to keep getting the best of whatever (and whomever) the world can give. Bellow all you like about America First, or la France pour les Françis, or anyplace else üer alles. As of 2017, at least, capital and its incessant planetary movements still reliably make a mockery of such slogans.

Sign up for  our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Correction: June 4, 2017, Sunday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An essay on May 7 about the globalization of trade misidentified a component of smartphones. “onflict minerals”which are taken from conflict zones) —ot rare-earth metals —re mined largely in Africa.

Illustration by Stephen Doyle 

Document NYTFEED020170504ed54002e6
