World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,184 words
31 January 2017
12:53
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

You're Fired

The White House on Monday fired acting Attorney General Sally Yates for telling government lawyers not to defend an executive order signed by President Donald Trumpsuspending immigration from seven countries out of concerns that terrorists from those countries might enter the U.S. Dana Boente, the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, will be acting attorney general until Mr. Trump's nominee, Jeff Sessions, is confirmed by the U.S. Senate, which could happen next week. The Justice Department standoff was the latest in a series of extraordinary events since Mr. Trump signed his order on Friday night, sparking confusion and protests at airports around the U.S., as well as condemnation from executives at blue-chip companies such as Goldman Sachs, Coca-Cola, Amazon and Ford. Meanwhile, Mr. Trump will amend a recent executive action so he can add CIA director Mike Pompeo into a role on the National Security Council. Mr. Trump is also scheduled to name his Supreme Court nominee today in a prime-time address.

Friend Request

 Facebook is trying everything to re-enter China—nd it's not working. Blocked on China's internet since 2009, the social-media giant has courted Chinese officials, made Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg more visible in China, hired a well-connected China-policy chief and begun developing technology that could cull content the Communist Party deems unacceptable. It has made no visible headway. And as time passes, Facebook is watching from the outside as Chinese companies mop up the market that might have been its own. Facebook faces a wary central government, which blamed social media for stirring ethnic unrest in 2009 and remains uneasy with the company's ability to be a dissidents' megaphone. Meanwhile, Facebook is aiming to be more essential to its 1.79 billion existing users, unveiling new technology to let them reset passwords for other websites using its platform.

Bitter Pill

Walgreens Boots Alliance and Rite Aid have agreed to reduce the amount Walgreens would pay for its rival by at least $2 billion, after the two companies struggled to get antitrust enforcers to bless the big drugstore deal. The companies said Monday they would look to sell more stores as they seek to satisfy regulators at the Federal Trade Commission, which has been reviewing the combination. The process may take up to six months, they said. Walgreens in October 2015 agreed to buy Rite Aid for $9 a share, or about $9.4 billion, to form a drugstore chain with more than 10,000 U.S. stores. FTC officials had raised concern that such a big company could hold too much sway in negotiations with pharmacy-benefits managers such as CVS Health's Caremark or Express Scripts Holding, which handle corporate and government drug plans.

Face the Facts

How can we cut through our resistance to unwanted information? We avoid looking at our bank accounts after paying the bills, resist stepping on a scale after the holidays, refuse to schedule preventive health tests. Researchers call this behavior information avoidance or strategic ignorance. We do it to avoid facts that make us feel bad, obligate us to do something we don't want to do, or challenge how we see ourselves, others or the world. Some avoid unwanted information because they might not have the financial or psychological resources to deal with that information. But we report that research shows that when people feel they have some control over the outcome of information, they're more likely to agree to hear it. We also offer strategies for facing the truth.

Today's Video

Your Friendly Robot Barista

Automation is eliminating jobs of factory workers and Uber drivers—ill your morning fix soon come from a precision caffeine machine? Our Personal Technology columnist Geoffrey A. Fowler tastes the new robot lattes at San Francisco's Cafe X.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

McCain, Again the Maverick, Challenges President Trump

Homeland Security Chief and White House Clash

WORLD

Police Charge Suspect for Murder in Quebec Mosque Attack

Head of Group Linked to 2008 Mumbai Attack Arrested in Pakistan

BUSINESS

Investors Press Arconic to Oust CEO Klaus Kleinfeld, Months After Alcoa Separation

Hearst Magazines' Content Chief Joanna Coles Pushes Snapchat and TV

MARKETS

The Markets Don't Believe in Trump for the Long Term

Deutsche Bank to Pay Nearly $630 Million to Settle Probes Into Russian Trades

Number of the Day

$1 billion

The approximate amount Sony said it would write down on its film and TV studio after a dismal year at the box office that included such disappointments as the reboot of "Ghostbusters," the Ang Lee drama "Billy Lynn's Long Halftime Walk" and the "Da Vinci Code" sequel "Inferno."

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what do you think of Facebook's efforts to re-enter China? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on Mr. Trump's executive order restricting immigration, Kristy Olshan of Pennsylvania wrote: "I'm encouraged by Mr. Trump's executive order restricting immigration from seven Muslim nations and candidly actions like this should have been taken much sooner to protect the American people." Bob Harris of New Jersey said: "This is exactly what he promised to do in the campaign. If anyone says he has no support for this action from the public, who do the naysayers think voted for him?" Joe Williams of Kansas shared: "Our ban is now their rallying cry. It will be used as conclusive evidence by ISIS that they were right when they proclaimed us the enemy of all Islam. We were great before Mr. Trump and Steve Bannon came to power. Will we be great when they're finished?" Barbara Courtney of Washington weighed in: "Mr. Trump's immigration ban was crafted and announced with no regard for the families it has already affected, for the people who are on the front line of enforcing it, for its legality, and for the message it sends to allies and foes around the world. It is amateur and shameful." And Barbara Arena of Florida commented: "If the Statue of Liberty could cry, tears would be streaming down her face."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170131ed1v003ml

