Best of Late Night
Arts; Television
Trevor Noah Watches Facebook’ Testimony ‘evolve Into Anger’

By GIOVANNI RUSSONELLO 
723 words
3 November 2017
09:57
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Welcome to Best of Late Night, a rundown that lets you sleep —nd lets us get paid to watch comedy. What do you think of it? What else are you interested in? Let us know: thearts@nytimes.com .

Social Media Under Oath

Trevor Noah on Thursday looked at the congressional testimonies of executives and lawyers from major social media companies. They have been called this week to account for the role of their organizations in spreading foreign-sponsored disinformation.

“ell, this is really depressing —oth for America and for Russian spies. Because in the old days, espionage meant using exploding pens and poison-tipped umbrellas. Now they have to use the same tool as your divorced aunt.”—REVOR NOAH

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Mr. Noah laughed as he watched Senator Al Franken become exasperated while seeking to get a simple answer out of Facebook’ general counsel, Colin Stretch.

“ love that even in real life, Facebook conversations devolve into anger and frustration. Because look at Al Franken: He’ doing a real-life ‘acepalm’moji. Look at him! The only thing missing was some random person popping in with a racial slur —nd that’ only because Jeff Sessions isn’ in the Senate anymore.”—REVOR NOAH

Back to ‘ut Cut Cut’

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Seth Meyers returned to a favorite topic from the night before: President Trump’ preferred name for the Republicans’ew tax legislation.

“rump has been insistent that the bill be called ‘he Cut Cut Cut Act.’ur president is so adult he can only think in chants. ‘ock her up!’‘uild the wall!’‘ut cut cut!’r. President, what’ on the agenda today? ‘e want golf!’”—ETH MEYERS

Jordan Klepper on Political Correctness

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

On “he Opposition,”ordan Klepper pulled out a gaslight as he tried to justify some of the Trump administration’ public statements. Later, he discussed Mr. Trump’ recent suggestion that “e’e so politically correct that we’e afraid to do anything.”

“e’ right. Political correctness is hobbling us. Do you have any idea how much energy our president wastes trying to not say racial slurs? If he could instead focus that energy for good, he could have defeated ISIS before Obama even had the chance to found it.”—ORDAN KLEPPER

The Punchiest Punchlines (Trebek Edition)

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

“isten, Catalonia, America has no desire to get into the middle of a civil war —f you don’ count Iraq, Afghanistan, Syria and Kardashia.”—STEPHEN COLBERT, hoping that a revolutionary showdown won’ overtake Western Europe, demanding a response from the United States

“n an interview, ‘eopardy!’ost Alex Trebek revealed that he once tripped hard on hash brownies. Tripped hard on hash brownies, yeah. Apparently Trebek spent hours saying, ‘hat is: my hand, for $800.’”—ONAN O’RIEN

The Bits Worth Watching

On this week’ edition of “he President Show,”nthony Atamanuik’ Mr. Trump has become a Macbeth-like figure, deeply afflicted and eager for “scape.”ue dream sequence.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

On “he Tonight Show,”he cast of “tranger Things”ad a dance battle.

[Video: Watch on YouTube.]

Enjoy the Weekend

If you’e watching “he Late Show”n Friday night, here’ one guest you won’ see: Jeremy Piven, the actor. Mr. Colbert taped their interview earlier this week, but producers decided to can the segment after sexual-harassment allegations emerged against Mr. Piven.

Have a great weekend, and check back with us on Tuesday morning for more Best of Late Night.

Also, Check This Out

Similar allegations continue to accrue around Kevin Spacey, and collaborators are starting to distance themselves from him. Now, Mr. Spacey has announced —n what is starting to sound like a familiar move for men under this kind of scrutiny —hat he will seek treatment.

Trevor Noah found the back-and-forth between the online giants and Congress distressingly similar to exchanges on social media: “he only thing missing was some random person popping in with a racial slur.” Comedy Central | Kevin Spacey at the Old Vic theater in London in 2015, when his 11-year run as artistic director came to an end. | Samir Hussein/Getty Images 

Document NYTFEED020171103edb30025t
