TGreats; SECTM2
Joshua Cohen

681 words
22 October 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
122
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Joshua Cohen

Author of ''Moving Kings''

Think about a conversation you'd only have with family. The doors are shut. The windows are down. You can get away with anything. You can goad and prick, you can accuse and insult, not just because a high fence separates you from the neighbors, but also because: Your family will forgive you. There's food on your plate and drink in your glass; you'll always have a seat at the table.

Now, think about a talk you might have with strangers. Out in the street. Among other strangers. In broad daylight. Suddenly, you're worried. Suddenly, you have to explain yourself. You have nothing to rely on. No mutual history, or not much. No mutual culture, or not much. All you have in common is a language, whose words seem to mean different things to different people, who all speak them with different accents that seem to signify different experiences of class and education and ethnicity and race -- though any judgments you wind up making, you'll have to ignore, or else accept as manifestations of your own prejudice.

In America, now more than ever, I'm convinced that we Jews have to hold our family conversations out in the open; we have to say the private things that might publicly shame; the narrow things that might widely offend; and we have to do all this not just in our school and work existences, but also on social media -- which isn't quite a safe space, let alone a warm kitchen wafting with unconditional love.

Still, our table talk must aspire to become our national talk; all of our dirty laundry, and dirty manners, must be aired. Take it from a writer: Broadcasting your parochial disputes relieves psychic pressures and disarms your enemies by forcing them to engage you as an individual. Converting shame into strength upholds the primacy of the self while vanquishing all haters.

Here is how it's done: In my opinion, the great Jewish Question in America today is whether Jared Kushner should be excommunicated -- and whether Ivanka Trump should be too. Of course, every family's table since Eden has had its share of bad apples (Sheldon Adelson), and every family member has, or should have, a different idea of who's the worst (Netanyahu). For example, I suspect that my parents, at this moment, are finding themselves far fonder of my brother and sister.

Jews in America are always being called upon to declare their loyalties -- which of our identifiers do we put before the hyphen, and which do we put after: ''Jewish'' or ''American''? This recurrent query -- which Jews in America ask themselves with all the breeziness of an online test, and anti-Semites in America ask with all the gravity of an Ellis Island examination -- is inevitable but pointless. Jews are more secure in contemporary America than they have been in any other country in Jewish history. This is because America is a country in which the citizens define the ideologies, not the other way around. This, ultimately, is what the fundamentalists hate: America's constitutive capacity for change, which they regard as the evil face of self-determination. Nazis, Klansmen, ISIS -- all fundamentalists resent the mutability of human life and the fact that, in a technologized world, no manner of racial or ethnic or religious or cultural purity can ever be guaranteed, as if an ''inalienable'' right.

The country I dream of is a place in which all humans are free to take their indoor voices out into the streets, both as proud members of families -- however myriad, however defined -- and as their own liberated individual selves. America has been this country only rarely; Israel has been this country almost never. The one country I've ever lived in that's consistently fulfilled this dream has been the Novel.

This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.

Cohen in the Negev, in southern Israel, around 1993. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOSHUA COHEN; JOSHUA SCOTT) 

Document NYTF000020171022edam0009n
