World News: Police Say Islamic State Behind Failed Bomb Plot

By Rob Taylor 
632 words
7 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CANBERRA, Australia -- Police said two men facing terrorism charges in Australia were involved in an aborted attempt to place an improvised explosive device on an Etihad Airways flight out of Sydney last month, in a plot directed by Islamic State.

The device was to be smuggled onto the July 15 flight, they said, but the plan was aborted before it reached security.

One of the men, a 49-year-old from Sydney, brought the device to the airport in a piece of luggage that he had asked his brother to take with him on the flight -- without telling the brother that the bag contained explosives, Australian Federal Police Deputy Commissioner Michael Phelan told reporters Friday.

For reasons still unclear, the bag never got past the check-in counter. Instead, Mr. Phelan said, the man left the airport with the bag, and his brother continued onto the flight without it.

"This is one of the most sophisticated plots that has ever been attempted on Australian soil," Mr. Phelan said.

The details Mr. Phelan provided are the first that officials have released since four men were arrested in a series of raids in Sydney last week.

Khaled Khayat, 49, and Mahmoud Khayat, 32, have been charged with two counts of planning a terrorist act. They were refused bail and the case has been adjourned until November. Their lawyer, Michael Coroneos, told reporters outside a Sydney court that the men were "entitled to the presumption of innocence."

A third man is in custody under special counterterrorism laws, while a fourth was released without charge.

Khaled Khayat's brother remains overseas and hasn't been charged in connection with the plot because police believe he had no idea the bag contained explosives, Mr. Phelan said.

After the initial bid failed, the two men changed tactics and were in the early stages of devising a "chemical-dispersion device" designed to release highly toxic hydrogen sulfide in a crowded area, police said.

Both plots were believed to have been planned with the help of a senior Islamic State member who sent the components for the device to the men in Sydney via air cargo from Turkey.

"The explosive was a high-end explosive, high military-grade explosive," said Mr. Phelan. "With assistancefrom the ISIL commander, the accused assembled the IED, the components, into what webelieve was a functioning IED to beplaced on that flight."

Etihad had no immediate comment, but earlier this week said it was assisting Australian police and "complying fully" with enhanced security measures.

The allegation that Islamic State was able to ship explosives to Australia undetected was troubling, Mr. Phelan acknowledged. Turkish embassy officials in Canberra declined to comment on how the material may have left the country.

Australia's five-tier terrorism threat alert system has been set at "probable," the third-highest level, since September 2014. In December of that year, a gunman, later identified as Iranian immigrant Man Haron Monis, took over a central Sydney cafeand held numerous people hostage for 16 hours before police killed him to end the siege. Two hostages -- the cafe's manager and a female customer -- also died.

Since then, police said there have been four attacks and 13 others disrupted, including a 2016 plot to behead police during national Anzac Day veterans' parades and a separate plot the same year to attack Christmas shoppers in Melbourne.

Mr. Phelan said that planning for the attack was believed to have begun around April, when the men were put in touch with the Islamic State commander through a relative fighting for the group in Syria.

If convicted, they could face life imprisonment.

---

With contributions from the Associated Press.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170806ed8700017
