World News: EU Says Al Qaeda Seeks to Pass  ISIS 

By Julian E. Barnes 
311 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BRUSSELS -- A resurgent al Qaeda is attempting to take advantage of a weakening Islamic State to challenge its rival for pre-eminence in the global jihadist movement, the European Union's police agency warned.

As a U.S.-led international military coalition rolls back Islamic State's self-declared caliphate in Iraq and Syria, al Qaeda undertook efforts in 2016 to replace it as leader of the movement, Europol said in its annual report on terrorism.

Al Qaeda's challenge to the extremist Sunni Muslims of its rival is occurring despite its messages in Arabic that tend to "downplay its international aspirations."

Its propaganda aimed at the West, however, echoes Islamic State's calls for terrorist attacks, the agency said Thursday.

Europol said al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, the organization's affiliate in Yemen, began publishing short English-language commentaries aimed at guiding would-be attackers in the West, offering advice on what groups to target in attacks and how to maximize the impact of strikes.

Among the report's other findings, it said the amount of propaganda generated by Islamic State fell, as military pressure on it grew and countermeasures by social-media companies became more effective, Europol said.

The total number of jihadist terrorist attacks slightly decreased in 2016, to 13 from 17 the year before. While the deaths caused by those attacks fell during the period, to 135 from 150, the casualty toll is still far higher than in other recent years, Europol said.

Meanwhile, arrests for terrorism-related offenses continued to increase for the fourth straight year, the agency said.

Rob Wainwright, Europol's executive director, said the need for improved information-sharing on suspected militants has become more pressing in the past two years.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170616ed6g0001q
