Notebook
Magazine
Who Didn’ Go to the Women’ March Matters More Than Who Did

By JENNA WORTHAM 
1,190 words
24 January 2017
17:27
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

There’ a photo making the rounds from the women’ march in Washington of a black woman named Angela Peoples (taken by her friend Kevin Banatte) holding a sign that reads, “on’ Forget: White Women Voted for Trump.”n the photo, she stands nonchalantly, casually sucking on a lollipop with a jaded look in her eyes that suggests her familiarity with the ritual of protest, of demonstrating for civil liberties. Behind her stand three white women, all wearing the pink knitted “ussyhats”hat the march made famous. Two are on their phones, pleased grins beaming from their faces. One appears to be taking a triumphant selfie.

A crowd scientist told The New York Times that half a million people came to Washington for the march, and a professor at the University of Connecticut calculated that across the United States, between 3.6 million and 4.6 million people demonstrated. International protests happened in cities like Nairobi, Oslo and Bangkok. The point is: A hell of a lot of women turned out to march. But the photo of Marie captures the fracturing view of America, seen through the lens of civil rights and feminism, that was crystallized after Nov. 8, 2016.

By some descriptions, the turnouts were multigenerational and multiracial. And it’ true that there were children everywhere, and their presence was one of the more hopeful notes of the day’ events, suggesting a long future of activism. And it is also true that some of the most visible speakers at the marches in the United States were women of color (America Ferrera, the Honduran-American actress, gave a rousing speech in D.C., as did Janet Mock. Aisha Tyler and Jessica Williams spoke at the march in Utah, during Sundance), but that was not reflected in the majority of the crowds. Most of the slide shows from the marches show only the occasional black attendee (including Rihanna, who, according to Instagram, showed up to the New York march after the sun went down).

But that didn’ prevent blackness from manifesting in the crowd. Popular signs infuriatingly lifted from moments in black culture, including “t’ Clit,” pun combining the popular slang “it”ith the reference to female anatomy, and several variations of “e Shall Overcomb,”hich conflated the gospel hymn and anthem of the civil rights movement with a garish cartoon of Donald Trump’ saffron-colored cloud of hair. There were other signs, too —argely held by white people, it’ worth noting —hat said, “e love our Muslim, Immigrant, L.G.B.T.Q., Latin Brothers and Sisters,”s well as Black Lives Matters posters. At one point during the march in Manhattan, which I observed for about an hour, an enormous photograph of Mahatma Gandhi floated by —n icon of nonviolence resistance, yes, but also someone who referred to African leaders more than once as savages and kaffirs, a South African derogatory slur. There were also many signs equating gender justice with racial justice. Vagina plushies abounded, as did drawings of vulva and birth canals, and legs spread exuberantly wide. As rallying cries, these were initially thrilling to see, but they began to feel exclusionary as the day wore on. Equating of vaginas with feminism with gender equality felt outdated, given that there were a number of trans women who showed up to support the cause. Other photos were also emblematic of this divide —otably, a sign carried by Amir Talai, an actor and improv performer, that said, “’l See You Nice White Ladies at the Next #BlackLivesMatter March, Right?”

But it is the photo of Peoples that resonates the most for me. It felt indicative of the ways in which the day’ events could be viewed as problematic: the notion that women’ rights were suddenly the most important cause in our nation, or that there haven’ been protests and activist movements worth attending until the election of Donald Trump. The photo of Peoples is certainly the image that was most shared among the black women I know and that surfaced in feeds from women who opted out of the march, who chose to spend time with their families or one another instead. Those who were criticized for not participating reminded their followers of the suffrage movement, when black women were increasingly marginalized in the fight for the right to vote, and highlighted the lack of policing at the women’ march, a luxury never granted at Black Lives Matters demonstrations. And they reminded anyone who’ forgotten that 53 percent of all white women who voted voted for Trump, while 94 percent of black women voters cast their ballots for Hillary Clinton. They reminded people that it is very likely that the white women in the photograph probably know —r are related to —omeone who voted for Trump. That photo cuts to a truth of the election: While black women show up for white women to advance causes that benefit entire movements, the reciprocity is rarely shown.

Every woman I spoke with who traveled to the D.C. march came back brimming with the energy of radicalism and the spirit of change. And it seems to have propelled people into action: Swingleft, which describes itself as an online network created to support progressive candidates in swing districts to “ake back the House in 2018,”eported that it had signed up more than 100,000 people this weekend. The official women’-march site now features a guide to “0 actions in 100 days”hat provides information for contacting senators to protest specific legislation. But here’ something that has stayed with me: On Sunday night, I got a voice message from a rattled friend describing an incident at a D.C. restaurant after the march. She had been with other friends —rown and black, Muslim, speaking Arabic —ll in town for a memorial service, having a quiet dinner afterward to help one another through their grief. A woman approached them and began asking invasive questions about Trump. The group initially complied, and tried to explain their fears when the situation escalated, culminating in the stranger’ hurling words at them like “ISIS”nd “Taliban.”earby sat a table of white women, still proudly donning their pussyhats. The women watched silently. None elected to intervene. “sn’ this what you marched for?”y friend said to them. “sn’ this what today was about? Standing up for injustice? Yet when you see it happen in your face, you just enjoy your meal quietly?”

The nature of American activism –nd feminism –s molting, fast. The coalitions that formed on Saturday will have bigger questions to organized around, questions that will prove more urgent in the years to come. For whom are they marching? Is it only for themselves?

Sign up for  our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Jenna Wortham is a staff writer for the magazine.

Kevin Banatte 

Document NYTFEED020170124ed1o004jx
