World; Middle East
Colleagues of Princeton University Scholar Convicted of Spying in Iran Express Shock

By RICK GLADSTONE 
883 words
18 July 2017
01:50
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Colleagues of an American student from Princeton University who was jailed in Iran on spying charges expressed shock on Monday, calling him a gifted and innocent history scholar whose ordeal has traumatized his family and community.

Academics and Iran experts said the arrest and punishment of the student, Xiyue Wang, first announced in Iran on Sunday, may chill scholarly ties between the United States and Iran, subverting Iranian President Hassan Rouhani’ promise of more openness.

“his kind of situation makes me wake up in a cold sweat,”aid Bruce Carruthers, the director of the Buffett Institute for Global Studies at Northwestern University in Evanston, Ill. “t is a deeply worrisome event, and I hope to God that it is not a trend or harbinger of things to come.”

Despite the history of hostility between the United States and Iran, scholarly exchanges have survived. But Mr. Wang’ case, Mr. Carruthers said, shows that “ visitor like that can be a bargaining chip.”

Mr. Wang, 37, a naturalized American citizen from China, was arrested in Iran last August while researching Persian history for his doctoral thesis. He had been examining and scanning public records of events during the 19th and early-20th centuries.

Iran’ judiciary, which broke the news of Mr. Wang’ arrest and punishment on Sunday, said Mr. Wang had entered the country “nder the cover of a researcher,”ad secretly worked for American and British intelligence via a “pider web”f connections and had digitally archived 4,500 documents.

Mr. Wang was sentenced to 10 years in prison, which could further irritate relations with the United States, where Iran’ incarceration of Americans has been a festering issue.

Princeton University acknowledged after the announcement that it had known about Mr. Wang’ arrest but had sought to keep it quiet, respecting his family’ wishes while working with the State Department and other channels to secure his release. Mr. Wang has a wife and a child in the United States.

In a statement to Princeton University faculty, students and staff on Monday, the university’ president, Christopher L. Eisgruber, explained the school’ earlier silence, saying it reflected “he recommendation of multiple advisers inside and outside of government who counseled us that publicity might be harmful to our student’ interests.”

Mr. Wang’ colleagues were frank in their anger about what had befallen him.

“iyue Wang is an unbelievable scholar, father and classmate,”Elaine Ayers, a doctoral candidate in the history of science, wrote on her Twitter account. “eyond concern for his safety and well-being.”

Anna Lind-Guzik, a graduate student in Russian history, wrote: “his is nuts! Xiyue Wang is a friend. We did all our coursework together. He’ a kind family man, great scholar & furthest thing from a spy.”

Mr. Wang’ thesis adviser, Professor Stephen Kotkin, strongly defended Mr. Wang’ work in a statement sent via email, describing him as a linguistically gifted doctoral candidate whose research “equired field work at multiple sites throughout a vast and complex region.”

Mr. Kotkin also implicitly criticized the Iranian judicial authorities, saying they made a colossal misjudgment about what constitutes espionage.

Trita Parsi, the president of the National Iranian American Council, a group that has advocated for improved relations with Iran, also described the accusations against Mr. Wang as ridiculous. “rom the evidence made public by Iran’ Judiciary against Mr. Wang, it appears that his only crime was to read books at a public library,”r. Parsi said.

He also said Mr. Wang’ prosecution reflected efforts by hard-line opponents of President Hassan Rouhani to sabotage his effort to promote interactions with the West.

“his serves to deter those who want to study in the country,”e said. “s they see Rouhani having greater success, things like this, precisely because they’e so absurd, will have a chilling effect.”

Mr. Wang’ case also reverberated in Beijing, his birthplace, where he had always shown a penchant for foreign languages.

According to Chinese media accounts, Mr. Wang went to the United States when he was 19 and studied at the University of Washington and Harvard University, focusing on southern Asian languages and religion in Middle Asia.

He became proficient in Pashto, a language spoken in Afghanistan, Iran and Pakistan, and for a time worked as a translator for the International Committee of the Red Cross in Kandahar, Afghanistan, where he helped Afghans traumatized by violence and death from the American-led war against the Taliban.

An article about Mr. Wang posted in 2010 on the Red Cross’ Chinese-language website, titled “e and the Taliban, Face to Face,”escribed Kandahar as “he most dangerous place in the world”or a translator.

Adam Wu and Christian Bischoff contributed reporting.

* Iran Dominates in Iraq After U.S. ‘anded the Country Over’

* For Iran, Qatar Crisis Is a Welcome Distraction

* Finding Bravado, and Worry, at an Iranian Shrine Where \b ISIS\b0  Struck

* Trump Under Pressure to Get Answers From Iran on Missing Ex-F.B.I. Agent

Xiyue Wang at his apartment in Hong Kong in 2009. Mr. Wang was sentenced to 10 years in prison on Sunday. | via Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170717ed7h008vh
