World
Iraqi Forces Disrupt Islamic State Supply Route; Troops capture town of Baaj, which lies between extremist strongholds of Mosul and Raqqa

By Ben Kesling 
905 words
4 June 2017
23:45
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—raqi paramilitary forces captured a hub on a key Islamic State supply route between Syria and Iraq, further disrupting the flow of fighters and goods between the terror group's major urban strongholds, Iraq's defense ministry said.

Units from Iraq's predominantly Shiite Muslim militias on Sunday retook the northwest town of Baaj, about 100 miles from Mosul, where Islamic State has lost substantial ground to U.S.-backed Iraqi forces. Baaj served as a staging ground for the extremists during a lightning advance that saw them seize about one-third of Iraq in 2014.

The town and the surrounding district, much of which sits on the Iraq-Syria border and which Iraqi forces also captured, have since been a main way station between Mosul and Raqqa, the Syrian city that is the group's de facto capital in Syria.

"It's a fatal blow to Daesh there since the liberation of the Baaj district means cutting off the connection between the Syrian Daesh in Raqqa and Iraqi Daesh in Mosul," said Brigadier Tahseen al-Khafaji, spokesman for the defense ministry, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

In 2015, Islamic State officials declared Baaj one of a few fallback cities in the event of the loss of a major stronghold like Mosul, said Hisham al-Hashimi, a Baghdad-based expert studying Iraqi extremism.

Much of the border area is sparsely populated and porous, allowing Islamic State to ferry goods and fighters. But as key roads and towns come under Iraqi control, options for Islamic State to resupply are diminishing.

Iraq's army and allied paramilitary forces have since 2015 dealt the Sunni Muslim terror group a series of key battlefield defeats, greatly reducing the amount of territory under its control. The battle for Mosul, its remaining major urban stronghold in the country, kicked off in October.

Iraqi forces drove the extremists from east Mosul in late January, and have since February fought a grinding battle for the city's west side. Victory in Baaj came as Iraqi troops continued a slow final advance in Mosul, marked by difficulties in using air power or heavy artillery in the densely populated area and Islamic State's use of civilians as human shields.

At an operations center close to the front lines in Mosul, Iraqi army Col. Hussein Mustafa sat on Sunday with American advisers in a dark room with large monitors, watching aerial surveillance of the front lines.

Some 300 to 400 civilian families were still trapped in his sector, just outside of Mosul's Old City. The sector is only a fraction of what remains under Islamic State control in the city.

Elsewhere, closer to the fighting, the sound of gunfire sounded a few hundred yards away from a stream of civilians as they hurried away from the front lines, many weeping and praising God that they had finally escaped Islamic State occupation.

Col. Mustafa's men know they have made gains against the remaining militants whenever a wave of civilians flows toward them from a cleared neighborhood, he said, because it means Islamic State has retreated. Medical stations and aid workers get inundated with the sick and wounded.

A fleeing resident who gave his name as Abu Zakariah said Islamic State fighters were the only people eating and drinking with regularity in west Mosul, with civilians subsisting mainly on coarse bread and foul-smelling water. He pulled up his shirt to show a sunken stomach and bony hips, his three sons similarly emaciated.

In the Zinjili neighborhood near the Old City, streets and buildings have been destroyed and hulks of cars piled on the sides of the street. Islamic State forced everyone to move their cars into the streets to serve as roadblocks, residents and Iraqi forces said, and some have been booby-trapped.

Advancing on one street controlled by Islamic State, Iraqi forces and aid workers found dozens of civilians lying dead or wounded by the group's snipers, shot as they tried to flee, according to military officials and witnesses.

Some 30 families were shot, according to Iraq's defense ministry. A spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition backing Iraqi forces in the battle against Islamic State said troops had used artillery to fire smoke-dispersing rounds to block snipers' view of civilians and allow residents to reach safety.

At an aid station near the front lines, a man who gave his name only as Shamel looked on as a doctor stitched up a gash in his sister's scalp. The siblings had run for their lives after their house collapsed in an explosion, whose cause they didn't know. Much of his family was still in the house when they left, he said as he wept.

When asked about the family's plight, Col. Mustafa said he knew the house belonging to Shamel.

"It will take a day or two to get to it," he said. "It's still controlled by Daesh."

Ghassan Adnan and Awadh Altaie contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Islamic State Called for Attacks During Ramadan

* France's Special Forces Hunt French Militants Fighting for Islamic State

* U.S. Says it Has Shifted Strategy in Fight Against \b ISIS\b0 

Document WSJO000020170604ed64003ux
