World
Islamic State Claims Series of Deadly Baghdad Bombings; Suicide attack in Sadr City is third such assault in recent days after Iraqi army, allied forces move to retake Mosul from terror group

By Ghassan Adnan and Ben Kesling 
412 words
2 January 2017
23:37
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State claimed a spate of bombings in Baghdad that Iraqi officials said had killed at least 28 people, days after the Iraqi army and allied forces renewed their offensive to retake the group's stronghold in Mosul.

The terror group on Monday claimed responsibility for three blasts in the Iraqi capital, two at hospitals and another in Sadr City, a predominantly Shiite Muslim neighborhood that is a frequent target of its attacks. In the Sadr City attack, day laborers gathered around a vehicle in front of a market before it was detonated, thinking the driver was looking to hire people, officials said.

Two additional unclaimed bombings also rocked the city, officials said. The five explosions wounded 49 people, they added.

The Sunni extremist group is falling back on past tactics as it comes under pressure in its major remaining Iraqi stronghold, showing it can still sow terror even in areas it doesn't control.

Islamic State frequently claims responsibility for bombings in Baghdad, although series of connected attacks there have become less common.

The group has also attacked areas far from the front lines of battle, including a November assault on the northern city of Kirkuk that took days to quell. On Sunday, it claimed an attack by five suicide bombers in the Shiite holy city of Najaf, killing eight people and wounding nearly two dozen.

Iraq's military, aided by air support from the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State, in October began a long-awaited offensive on Mosul. It made quick advances on the city's outskirts in its early weeks, but has since been bogged down by the city's narrow alleys and streets.

The U.S. military on Dec. 29 announced a renewal of offensive operations by Iraqi forces. Included are Iraq's Counterterrorism Forces, the elite troops who have borne much of the fighting and sustained heavy casualties on Mosul's front lines.

"The Iraqi multiaxis advance opens two new fronts within the city and increases pressure on ISIL's dwindling ability to generate forces, move fighters or resupply," the U.S. said, using an acronym for Islamic State.

Ali A. Nabhan contributed to this article.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170102ed1200335
