REVIEW & OUTLOOK (Editorial)
The Kurds' Catalonian Turn

537 words
25 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Do Iraq's Kurds want a self-sufficient, internationally recognized independent state or, like the Catalonians of Spain, a permanent grievance to complain about? One has to wonder, given plans for a Monday plebescite that threatens the ethnic group's security and economic prosperity.

Masoud Barzani, the head of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG), announced his intention to hold a referendum in 2014, but postponed the measure to help Baghdad and Washington beat back Islamic State advances in Iraq. Now that the terrorists are in retreat, he says the time is right for a vote.

Mr. Barzani says his people have a "natural, god-given right" to self-determination, and it's easy to sympathize. The Kurds, spread across Iran, Iraq, Syria and Turkey, share a common language, culture and geography. They've proved a reliable partner for Washington fighting Islamic terrorism and protecting their territory, which is why the U.S. enforced a decade-long no-fly zone to protect them from Saddam Hussein's depredations after the first Gulf War.

The strategic question isn't the sincerity of long-held Kurdish aspirations for self-governance, but whether Monday's vote would help or hurt their cause. Certainly the referendum lacks legal standing; Iraq's constitution doesn't have an opt-out clause, and earlier this month the country's Supreme Court put a temporary hold on the vote.

Nor is it clear that the Kurds would improve their economic circumstances by voting yes. Mr. Barzani may believe a nonbinding vote will give him political leverage to negotiate more autonomy and better economic support from Baghdad. In reality, it will kill a U.S.-brokered deal already on the table that would assuage Kurdish concerns about border security, oil revenues and regional relations. The vote would also undermine the government of Iraq's prime minister, Haider al-Abadi.

Then there's the real threat of military conflict and ethnic strife if the vote proceeds. Istanbul and Tehran oppose the KRG's referendum, fearing it will stoke Kurdish uprisings in their own countries. Turkey has already held tank drills on its border with the Iraqi Kurdish region, and those tanks could roll south quickly if Monday's vote proceeds. Iran, which dislikes Mr. al-Abadi's close relationship with Washington and wants to see him ejected from power, would cheer.

The Trump Administration denounced the vote on Wednesday, warning "the decision to hold the referendum in disputed areas is especially de-stabilizing, raising tensions which ISIS and other extremist groups are now seeking to exploit." Washington has an interest in not further inflaming an Arab-Kurd conflict, and keeping Iraq steady while the White House deals with Iran, the Syrian conflict, and the Gulf spat between Saudi Arabia and Qatar.

Mr. Barzani has backed himself into a corner by pushing ahead with a vote that wasn't supported by his allies or particularly well-conceived. It won't be easy for him to save face now, but postponing the vote and suffering political embarrassment is a small price to pay to protect the long-term interests of the Kurds he says he wants to help.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170924ed9p0000w
