World
After Defeating  ISIS  Together, Iraqi Kurds Seek Divorce From Baghdad; Kurdish referendum plan raises specter of aftershocks across Iraq

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
1,089 words
29 June 2017
11:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The one thing that isn't in doubt in Iraqi Kurdistan's planned independence referendum is the result. It's virtually certain that an overwhelming majority will back the creation of the world's newest country.

The real question is what practical steps toward the breakup of Iraq will be taken, and how soon after the vote, which is scheduled for Sept. 25.

Will Kurdistan's bickering politicians finally put their differences aside? And will they, Iraq's federal authorities, and the region's meddling neighbors be able to prevent events spinning out of control in the referendum's inevitably contentious aftermath?

None of these neighbors—ran, Syria and Turkey—ant the Kurdish independence to succeed in Iraq, lest it inspires restless Kurdish minorities within their own borders. And, while some officials in President Donald Trump's administration privately cheer the Kurdish independence cause, maintaining the unity of Iraq remains the official policy of the U.S. and its Western allies.

The country's Western partners are concerned that the referendum—ven if it doesn't lead to independence anytime soon—ill change the political climate in the rest of the country. With Iraq's federal elections looming next year, that could bring to power radical Shiite forces hostile to the more inclusive approach of Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.

It all adds up to a greater risk to regional stability just as Islamic State is finally being defeated in Iraq and Syria.

"We think the referendum is a bad idea, and the timing is a bad idea, first of all because the Kurds are not prepared for this," said a senior U.S. official. "If the Kurds go ahead with the referendum this year, it will strengthen the more polarizing and more sectarian figures [in Baghdad], and disadvantage those who are more moderate and who would reach across sectarian lines and form alliances."

Kurdistan officials retort that now is precisely the right time to tackle the historic Kurdish desire to form a separate nation, after Mr. Abadi's government and the Kurdish leadership established close cooperation fighting side-by-side to oust Islamic State from Mosul. Kurdistan plans detailed negotiations with Baghdad on how and when to implement the breakup, the officials said.

"To answer the question of why now: We can achieve through this positive relationship a mutual understanding because, after Abadi, who knows who will be responsible in Baghdad? We want to avoid future confrontation and future bloodshed by ending this unhealthy interdependence in relations with Baghdad," said Hemin Hawrami, senior assistant to Kurdistan President Masoud Barzani, who called the referendum, and head of political affairs at the Kurdistan presidency.

"The referendum is for independence, but it doesn't mean that on the 26th of September we are going to declare independence. It is the start of a long process," Mr. Hawrami added.

While Iraq's federal government views the vote as illegal because no legislation to conduct it exists, Baghdad is unlikely to do anything to oppose it. "Most Iraqis in federal areas right now are not supportive of the referendum, but to be frank they are not in a position to spend too much time worrying about it because there are so many other problems in the country," said Sajad Jiyad, managing director of the Al Bayan Center, a Baghdad think-tank.

Kurdish-populated areas of northern Iraq have enjoyed broad self-rule since 1991, an arrangement expanded and enshrined in the 2005 Iraqi constitution. Kurdistan, a region roughly the size of Ireland that is home to some 5.2 million people, already has its own security forces and immigration controls. Federal troops and police aren't allowed on its soil without special permission.

Complicating any move toward a breakup with Iraq is the issue of disputed territories—reas outside the recognized boundaries of the Kurdistan Regional Government, such as the city of Kirkuk and nearby oil fields, that are controlled by Kurdish forces and contain large Kurdish populations.

Kurdish Peshmerga troops took over many of these areas over the last three years, in the course of the war against Islamic State. Baghdad seeks to regain control of these contested territories and has condemned Kurdish plans to hold the referendum there, let alone to permanently annex them.

"If the referendum is held and a breakup is achieved, it will create more conflicts over issues such as disputed territories," warned Ammar Tuma, head of the Shiite Fadhila bloc in the Iraqi parliament. "There will be no benefit for the Kurds, and no benefit for the Iraqis."

The only other recent example of a non-Arab area seceding from an Arab-majority country to form a separate nation isn't all that encouraging. South Sudan became independent following a referendum in 2011 and two years later descended into a civil war that has displaced millions.

Iraqi Kurds had their own civil war in the 1990s. The Kurdistan region remains divided between western areas controlled by the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Mr. Barzani and eastern areas under the sway of the rival Patriotic Union of Kurdistan.

The self-ruled region's institutions have been paralyzed by a political crisis that erupted in 2015, after Mr. Barzani's mandate expired. Kurdistan's parliament, which had planned a session to elect a successor, has been unable to meet for nearly two years because KDP forces prevent the entry of its speaker to the region's capital. Kurdistan's presidential and parliamentary elections are slated for November, just weeks after the planned referendum.

Mr. Barzani has called the long-promised independence vote just as protests against the political deadlock and corruption spread throughout Kurdistan. By doing so, he deftly exploited the Kurdish nationalist sentiment to stave off domestic unrest, at least for now.

"The feeling of distrust was reaching a peak, and people were feeling that the Kurdish leadership was no longer entitled to lead the Kurdish national cause," said Maria Fantappie, a Kurdish-affairs specialist at the International Crisis Group. "But now the national feeling is prevailing, so far. The Kurdistan leaders have played this trick well."

Write to Yaroslav Trofimov at yaroslav.trofimov@wsj.com

Related reading

* Battle for Mosul Resets Ties Between Kurds and Baghdad

* Trump Set to Arm Kurds in \b ISIS\b0  Fight, Angering Turkey

* Who Are the Kurds?

* Kurds Carve Out a Home in Syria, Testing U.S. Ties With Turkey

Document WSJO000020170629ed6t001s0
