World News: World Watch

785 words
23 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SOUTH KOREA

Salvaging Begins

Of Sunken Ferry

Workers began the difficult process of raising a 6,800-ton ferry that sank in 2014, killing more than 300 people and triggering a public uproar.

The salvaging operation began after hours of preparations and tests, an official from the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries said.

Workers on two barges have slipped 66 cables beneath the Sewol ferry, which had been lying on its left side in about 130 feet of water. The cables are connected to a frame of metal beams divers have spent months putting in place.

The bodies of 295 passengers -- most of whom were students on a high-school trip -- were recovered after the sinking on April 16, 2014, but nine are still missing. Relatives are hoping that those remains will be found inside the ferry.

The ministry believes workers will be able to lift the upper side of the ferry about 42 feet above the surface by Thursday morning if water and weather conditions remain stable.

Workers will then begin loading it onto a semisubmersible, heavy-lift vessel that will carry it to a mainland port. That process, including emptying the ferry of water and fuel, is expected to take days.

The ferry disaster touched off an outpouring of national grief and triggered anger over what was seen as a botched rescue job by the government.

The ferry's captain is serving a life sentence after a court found him guilty of committing homicide through "willful negligence" because he fled the ship without issuing an evacuation order.

-- Associated Press

---

CHINA

Beijing Denies Plan

For Offshore Station

Beijing denied having plans to build on a disputed South China Sea outcrop also claimed by the Philippines, days after a Chinese mayor triggered alarm in Manila by raising the prospect in an interview.

Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying said reports about Chinese plans to construct an environmental-monitoring station on Scarborough Shoal "are mistaken," citing checks with relevant Chinese authorities.

Her denial followed an unusual sequence of events last week, when a state-owned newspaper quoted Xiao Jie, mayor of Sansha, a Chinese outpost in the South China Sea, as saying local authorities would build environmental-monitoring stations on several reefs and maritime features, including Scarborough Shoal -- only to later delete the remark from the interview on its website.

Mr. Xiao's remark prompted Manila to ask clarification from Beijing over its intentions. Philippine officials say China has promised no construction on the uninhabited outcrop -- a pledge that facilitated the recent rapprochement between the two countries.

The Philippine Department of Foreign Affairs didn't respond to a request to comment.

-- Chun Han Wong

---

ISLAMIC STATE

U.S. Sets Out Goals

For Protected Areas

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said the U.S. would work to establish "interim zones of stability" to protect refugees in Syria and Iraq as the international coalition against Islamic State works to retake territory from the extremist group.

"The United States will increase our pressure on ISIS and al Qaeda and will work to establish interim zones of stability, through cease-fires, to allow refugees to return home," Mr. Tillerson said, addressing the first meeting under the Trump administration of the 68-member coalition against Islamic State at the State Department.

The Trump administration has been exploring various proposals for establishment of protected areas, sometimes called safe zones, in Syria. The idea has been pushed by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan but the Pentagon has long opposed the idea of creating heavily guarded zones because of the cost and military commitment required.

There is growing receptiveness among U.S. and international officials to the idea of setting up unofficial Syrian safe zones, which some officials have dubbed "interim de-escalation areas," along Syria's borders with Turkey and Jordan.

-- Felicia Schwartz

---

BELGIUM

A Year On, Concerns

Of New Attack Grow

U.S. and Belgian officials have grown increasingly worried about the prospect that a key figure behind the 2016 Brussels bombings is plotting a new terror attack, people briefed on the investigation said.

The Brussels bombings -- which killed 32 people and injured hundreds more, some with life-altering injuries -- took place one year ago. As the anniversary approached, anxiety has grown among some officials about a follow-up attack.

Investigators see Oussama Atar, a Belgian national who served time in Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison, as having the motivation and possibly the means to organize a new attack or carry one out himself.

Mr. Atar is believed to be in Syria and is likely to grow more desperate as pressure mounts on Islamic State there, officials said.

-- Julian E. Barnes

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170322ed3n0000h
