World News: Kurd-Led Force Cleared To Take  ISIS  Bastion

By Maria Abi-Habib and Raja Abdulrahim 
615 words
12 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT -- A Kurdish-led military force in Syria is closing in on Islamic State's stronghold of Raqqa after taking the strategic Tabqa dam nearby, days after the fighters won rare approval from both Washington and Damascus to battle the extremist group.

Islamic State's loss of the dam on the Euphrates River about 30 miles southwest of its Syrian seat of power is a major blow to the terror group, which held the structure for more than three years. The U.S. long worried the militants would rig the dam with explosives, allowing it to unleash floods on the surrounding population and American-backed forces.

The Kurd-dominated Syrian Democratic Forces captured Tabqa Wednesday, a day after the U.S. pledged to arm the fighters and the Damascus government for the first time endorsed their battle against Islamic State. At a Monday news conference in Damascus, Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem complimented the SDF's fight against Islamic State and described the force as legitimate.

The SDF is now the only ground force with both U.S. and Syrian government approval to fight Islamic State as the offensive on Raqqa draws near. While anti-government rebel factions have also fought Islamic State, the Syrian government has long deemed them terrorists in light of their goal to oust President Bashar al-Assad's regime.

As the Kurdish-led fighters supported by U.S. Special Operations Forces on the ground inch closer to Raqqa, the question of who will hold the city the day after it falls is becoming more urgent. Turkey, a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and its Syrian Arab rebel allies oppose the rival Kurds leading the battle and fear they will try to hold onto the majority-Arab city after it is captured.

Arab rebels particularly distrust the YPG, the Syrian Kurdish militia that dominates the SDF, because it has used the U.S.-backed fight against Islamic State to take over a large swath of territory across northern Syria -- including predominantly Arab cities and towns -- with the expressed goal of carving out a semi-autonomous Kurdish region. The rebels and opposition activists have long accused the YPG of colluding with the Syrian regime for its own benefit.

President Donald Trump has made clear he opposes the expensive nation-building missions that have historically accompanied U.S. counterterrorism operations to support local governments and prevent insurgents from returning.

For these reasons, Western diplomats say the post-capture plan is for the SDF to hand over the administration of Raqqa to a local civilian council friendly to the Syrian regime. That council could eventually transfer control of the city back to the regime, these diplomats said.

On Thursday, Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail Bogdanov said Moscow supports the formation of local councils to administer territory taken from Islamic State but said they must not circumvent the Syrian government's authority, in comments carried by Interfax news agency.

An official from the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, which is fighting for the Syrian regime, recently described Kurdish cooperation with the Syrian government as a win for both sides. The regime treated the ethnic minority as second-class citizens before the outbreak of war in 2011.

"Now the regime needs the Kurds and will count them as loyal citizens and improve their services if they cooperate," the Hezbollah official said. "For a long time, many of them didn't have the Syrian nationality or even basic government services."

---

Nour Alakraa and Noam Raydan contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170511ed5c0001o
