World News: Saudi-Led Coalition to Focus on Protection From  ISIS 

By Saeed Shah in Islamabad, Pakistan, and Margherita Stancati in Dubai 
459 words
19 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A Saudi-led coalition force of 41 countries is taking shape and has found a focus: protecting member nations against the threat from Islamic State as the militant group's strongholds in Iraq and Syria disintegrate.

The coalition, sometimes referred to as the "Muslim NATO," is expected to have its first substantive meeting over the next few months in Riyadh when defense ministers from member states, from Morocco to Malaysia, will gather to agree on its structure and mission.

However, these are Sunni-majority nations and absent from the alliance is Saudi Arabia's major rival in the Middle East, Shiite powerhouse Iran, which sees the grouping as a sectarian show of force.

The new coalition -- concerned over where in the Middle East and Africa militants from Islamic State could lodge themselves as their "caliphate" in Iraq and Syria collapses -- will set up a mobile military force to aid member countries that don't have strong counterterrorism capabilities. It also will battle other jihadist groups spilling out of war-torn Libya and Yemen, and Boko Haram in west Africa.

Under pressure from Riyadh, close ally Pakistan will provide a separate force of some 5,000 men to Saudi Arabia to help guard its vulnerable south, near the border with Yemen, Pakistani officials said.

At Saudi request, the coalition force will be led by the former head of Pakistan's army, Gen. Raheel Sharif, said Pakistani officials. Gen. Sharif was lauded for taking the fight to Pakistani militants.

Pakistan had said it wanted to focus on its battle with terrorism at home and stay out of the big confrontation in the Middle East between Riyadh and Tehran. Experts say the coalition will inevitably antagonize Tehran.

The military component is the focus of the alliance, which officials say is expected to be fully operational by year's end. Its command and control center in Riyadh recently began hiring staff. It will also seek to boost cooperation to combat extremist ideology and terror financing.

The alliance isn't restricted to confronting terror groups like Islamic State and al Qaeda, said Maj. Gen. Ahmed Asiri, an adviser to Saudi Arabia's minister of defense who is involved in assembling the new alliance. He said the coalition could move against rebel groups and militias that pose a threat to member countries.

Iran's ambassador to Islamabad, Mehdi Honardoost, said this month that he had protested Gen. Sharif's appointment to Pakistan and that Muslim countries "should come together to form a coalition of peace to resolve their issues rather forming a controversial military alliance."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170419ed4j0000r

