World; Americas
‘llahu Akbar!’n Everyday Phrase, Tarnished by Attacks

By ERIC NAGOURNEY 
693 words
2 November 2017
10:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

When H. A. Hellyer is out walking with his family, strangers sometimes approach him and declare, “llahu akbar!”

Many Westerners may find it hard to believe these days, but Mr. Hellyer does not recoil in fear.

“’l be walking out with my kids,”e said, “nd someone will say: ‘h, they’e so cute. Allahu akbar.’nd I’l joke, ‘hank you —ow stop talking to my kids.’”

The Arabic phrase, which means simply “od is great,”as, it sometimes seems, become intertwined with terrorism.

The driver of a truck that mowed down 20 people on a Manhattan bike path on Tuesday was said to have cried out “llahu akbar”efore he was shot by a police officer. The men who carried out the attack on the French newspaper Charlie Hebdo in 2015 shouted it during their onslaught. And the phrase rang through the air as a British soldier was run down near military barracks in 2013 and then hacked to death.

But for Mr. Hellyer and other Muslims, Allahu akbar is so commonplace a saying as to be utterly unworthy of note. “t’ quite an innocuous expression,”e said.

Its origin is explicitly religious. It is said in the call to prayer that is heard five times day, and in the prayers that follow.

But it is heard far from the mosque, too.

“omething good will happen and people will say, ‘ongratulations’—nd they will proclaim God’ greatness as a way of recognizing what they see as the divine blessing,”aid Mr. Hellyer, a scholar of religion and politics at the Atlantic Council who lives in London.

Its use can be even less divinely inspired.

“et’ say your football team is mounting an attack,”aid Ahdaf Soueif, an Egyptian author. “ou can say, ‘llahu akbar, Allahu akbar, Allahu akbar,’nd you’e pushing them along, like, ‘o for it, go for it, go for it.’”

Even more prosaically, Ms. Soueif said, “ou see a really beautiful woman or a good-looking guy, you go, ‘llahu akbar.’”

But the phrase —o many Muslims’istress —as also been seized on by jihadists who claim that Islam justifies their attacks on innocent civilians in the name of God.

And in tense times, language itself can become a barrier.

Last year, for example, a Berkeley student was removed from a Southwest Airlines flight after a fellow passenger heard him on the phone telling his uncle he would call him when they landed, “nshallah.”he phrase means “od willing”nd —s in the West —s widely used in conversation.

And in 1999, when an EgyptAir jetliner inexplicably plummeted into the Atlantic Ocean, American investigators concluded that it had been downed intentionally because the voice recorder captured a crew member saying, “awakilt ala Allah”—“ put my trust in God.”

To the investigators’ars, the phrase suggested ill intent. But to many Muslims, it was simply a man accepting his fate.

Still, when it comes to Allahu akbar, there is no denying that what it means can depend on who is saying it.

Ms. Soueif pointed to the reported use of the phrase by the suspect in the Manhattan attacks. Mr. Hellyer suggested, though, that in the end, it had little real meaning.

“eople may read the headlines about the attack and say: ‘h, he said “llahu akbar,”o that means something,’”e said. “ell, it probably means that he thinks it means something —ut that shouldn’ mean anyone who says ‘llahu akbar’s suddenly about to do some violent act. Far from it.”

Mohamed Andeel, an Egyptian cartoonist and writer, wonders if it is worth trying to teach non-Muslims the real meaning of Allahu akbar.

“f you tell people not to be afraid of something,”e said, “hey will basically learn to be afraid of something else.”

* I Want ‘llahu Akbar’ack

* Prosecutors Describe Driver’ Plan to Kill in Manhattan Terror Attack

* When Its Attacker Is in Handcuffs, \b ISIS\b0  Stays Mum

Gathering for prayer at a mosque in Doha, Qatar. | Tomas Munita for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171102edb20020d
