World
Kurd-Led Force Homes In on  ISIS  Bastion With Assent of U.S. and Syria Alike; After taking crucial nearby dam, SDF is poised to capture Raqqa, Islamic State's Syrian centerpiece

By Maria Abi-Habib and Raja Abdulrahim 
1,132 words
11 May 2017
21:24
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

BEIRUT— Kurdish-led military force backed by Washington and now approved by Damascus is closing in on Islamic State's stronghold of Raqqa after taking the strategic Tabqa dam nearby.

The Kurd-dominated Syrian Democratic Forces captured Tabqa Wednesday, a day after the U.S. pledged to arm the fighters. On Monday, the Damascus government for the first time endorsed the group's battle against Islamic State, with Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem complimenting the SDF's fight against Islamic State at a press conference in Damascus, describing the force as legitimate.

The SDF is now the only ground force with both U.S. and Syrian government approval in the fight against Islamic State as the offensive on Raqqa draws near. The group has long co-existed with the Syrian government, unlike U.S.- backed factions that Damascus deems terrorists in light of their goal to oust President Bashar al-Assad's regime.

Islamic State's loss of the dam on the Euphrates River about 30 miles southwest of its Syrian seat of power is a major blow to the terror group, which held the structure for more than three years. The U.S. long worried the militants would rig the dam with explosives, allowing it to unleash floods on the surrounding population and American-backed forces.

The SDF launched its attack in March from numerous fronts on the town of Tabqa and its nearby dam, which provides water and electricity for hundreds of thousands of people. After weeks of battle and nearly surrounding the town, the SDF negotiated the withdrawal of dozens of Islamic State militants from the area to protect the dam infrastructure, according to the U.S. Central Command.

In March, Islamic State accused the U.S. of launching airstrikes on the dam, saying it caused potentially devastating damage.

As the Kurdish-led fighters supported by U.S. Special Operations Forces on the ground inch closer to Raqqa, the question of who will hold the city the day after it falls is becoming more urgent. Turkey, a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and its Syrian Arab rebel allies oppose the rival Kurds leading the battle and fear they will try to hold onto the majority-Arab city after it is captured.

Arab rebels particularly distrust the YPG, the Syrian Kurdish militia that dominates the SDF, because it has used the U.S.-backed fight against Islamic State to take over a large swath of territory across northern Syria—ncluding predominantly Arab cities and towns—ith the expressed goal of carving out a semi-autonomous Kurdish region. The rebels and opposition activists have long accused the YPG of colluding with the Syrian regime for its own benefit.

U.S. President Donald Trump has made clear he opposes the expensive nation-building missions that have historically accompanied U.S. counterterrorism operations to support local governments and prevent insurgents from returning.

For these reasons, Western diplomats say the post-capture plan is for the SDF to hand over the administration of Raqqa to a local civilian council friendly to the Syrian regime. That council could eventually transfer control of the city back to the regime, these diplomats said.

The formation of the local civilian council for Raqqa, composed of both Kurds and Arabs, was announced last month. On Thursday, Russia's Deputy Foreign Minister Mikhail Bogdanov said Moscow supports the formation of local councils to administer territory taken from Islamic State but said they must not circumvent the Syrian government's authority, in comments carried by Interfax news agency.

"The U.S. military will be going in [to Raqqa] and trying to figure out who the tribal leaders are," said an American official involved in the anti-Islamic State campaign. "The regime knows these details. They have a natural home-field advantage and have a way of slowly getting back in. We won't be in Raqqa in 2020, but the regime will be there."

Western officials say the SDF operation that unfolded in the northern Syrian city of Manbij last year could serve as a blueprint for Raqqa's eventual handover to Damascus. The Kurdish-led force took Manbij from Islamic State in August and handed over some surrounding towns to the Syrian and allied Russian armies in March.

An official from the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, which is fighting for the Syrian regime, recently described increasing Kurdish cooperation with the Syrian government as a win for both sides. With Damascus poised to retake much of the country with help from Iran, Russia, Hezbollah and other Shiite foreign fighters, the official said the Syrian Kurds realize they can gain from cooperating with Mr. Assad's government. The regime treated the ethnic minority as second-class citizens before the outbreak of war in 2011.

"Now the regime needs the Kurds and will count them as loyal citizens and improve their services if they cooperate," the Hezbollah official said. "For a long time, many of them didn't have the Syrian nationality or even basic government services."

Ahead of Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan's visit to Washington next week to meet Mr. Trump, Turkish officials have opposed U.S. plans to liberate Raqqa using the SDF. They have instead lobbied for a Turkish-trained Syrian Arab force to take the city.

The U.S. has been skeptical of Turkish claims that it has a large enough rebel force to take Raqqa. Turkey views the SDF as an extension of the main Syrian Kurdish militia, the YPG, which is closely tied to the PKK— group fighting for autonomy within Turkey that Ankara deems a terror organization.

The Pentagon's statement Tuesday that it would arm the SDF to take Raqqa ends the debate and political jockeying over which force will be used to spearhead the offensive.

American officials confirmed Thursday that Tabqa dam was taken by the SDF, backed by U.S. ground forces. The extremists' hold on their Iraqi capital in Mosul is also near collapse in a separate offensive led by the Iraqi army, backed by the U.S. and other Western countries.

Nour Alakraa and Noam Raydan contributed to this article.

Write to Maria Abi-Habib at maria.habib@wsj.com and Raja Abdulrahim at raja.abdulrahim@wsj.com

More

* Trump Set to Arm Kurds in \b ISIS\b0  Fight, Angering Turkey (May 9)

* U.S. Dismisses Russia's Ban Over Syrian Safe Zones (May 5)

* U.S. Caught Between Ally Turkey and Kurdish Partner(May 4)

* Tangled Alliances in the Syrian Conflict (April 7)

Document WSJO000020170511ed5b00565
