World News:  ISIS  Bombs Mosque As Troops Close In

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
451 words
23 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Islamic State militants bombed the historic Nouri Grand Mosque in Mosul late Wednesday, Iraq's military said, destroying the site where Islamic State's leader first announced the creation of a self-declared caliphate straddling Iraq and Syria.

The destruction of the mosque came as Iraqi counterterrorism forces approached within 50 meters of the structure, in a final push of an eight-month campaign to reclaim the last major urban territory controlled by Islamic State in the country.

The mosque had became a symbol of the militant group's control of huge swaths of the country in 2014. Its destruction comes nearly three years to the day Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi used the landmark to announce the creation of his so-called caliphate -- a territory that has shrunk significantly in recent months. Since October, Iraqi forces backed by U.S. advisers and air power have reclaimed nearly all of Mosul.

Iraq's military called the detonation of the ancient mosque "a historic crime."

Islamic State, in a statement posted online through its media arm, claimed the mosque had been destroyed by an American airstrike.

"As our Iraqi Security Force partners closed in on the al-Nuri mosque, ISIS destroyed one of Mosul and Iraq's great treasures," said Maj. Gen. Joseph Martin, commanding general of Combined Joint Forces Land Component Command-Operation Inherent Resolve.

"This is a crime against the people of Mosul and all of Iraq, and is an example of why this brutal organization must be annihilated," Gen. Martin said.

The structure sat in the small Old City district where the militants are putting up a fierce fight in a city that they have all but lost, but at one point symbolized their startling strength.

In July 2014, Mr. Baghdadi ascended the imam's pulpit in the historic mosque and made his first public speech, declaring himself the leader of all Sunni Muslims. Built in the late 12th century on the western bank of the Tigris River, and once best known for its 150-foot leaning minaret, it quickly became a symbol of Islamic State's grip on Mosul.

His speech came less than one month after the extremist group's fighters swarmed Iraq's Sunni population centers, seizing about one-third of the country in a blitz that sent Iraqi forces into retreat and ceding control of Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, to Islamic State.

The mosque's reclamation holds mostly symbolic value for Iraqi forces just starting to break the militants' fierce grip on western Mosul's Old City, a densely packed warren of narrow streets and alleys and brittle homes.

Document AWSJ000020170622ed6n0000m
