World News: Terrorist Was 'Unyielding' On Islam

By Eric Sylvers in Fagnano, Italy, and Giovanni Legorano in Rome 
800 words
16 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

Valeria Collina tried in June 2016 to enter the east London fast-food restaurant where her son Youssef Zaghba worked in the kitchen. He blocked her at the door, saying she couldn't sit there unaccompanied by a male relative.

"He was becoming more and more unyielding in his views on Islam," Ms. Collina said in an interview outside Bologna. "But there was no reason to think it could end in the terrible act that he did."

More than a year before Zaghba and two other terrorists killed eight people in a rampage at London Bridge and nearby Borough Market this month, the Italian-Moroccan man's steady radicalization had alarmed his family and raised the suspicions of Italian authorities. But despite the warning signs, he slipped through the grasp of Italian security personnel with an aggressive approach to extremists and years of experience combating the mafia.

"You hear about the guys who become terrorists after coming out of jail or those who are ex-drug addicts looking for something to latch onto," Ms. Collina said. "But Youssef is a different case and maybe that makes it more dangerous and harder to control."

The problem of Islamic extremism has been less severe in Italy than in other European countries, in part because Muslim immigration has been more limited here than elsewhere in the region. About 2.7% of the country's population is Muslim, compared with 8.7% in France, according to the World Religion Database.

Italy hasn't suffered a major Islamist terrorist attack. The country has seen about 100 foreign fighters depart for battlefields in the Middle East, and several hundred people are under special observation for the risk of radicalism in Italian jails -- far fewer than in other large European countries.

The country has long had some of Europe's strictest antiterrorism laws, a legacy of its experience combating the mafia and homegrown political terrorism. Authorities have broad authority to wiretap suspects and to order preventive detention if they feel a subject could repeat an offense or hide potential evidence.

But since most of the country's suspected Islamist extremists are foreign-born, authorities' main tool in combating them has been expulsion and repatriation. Italy has been especially aggressive at expelling people who display extremist views, even if they haven't been convicted of any crime. Since January 2015, the country has expelled 184 suspected extremists.

Such techniques didn't apply to Zaghba, who was born in Morocco of an Italian mother and a Moroccan father and had dual citizenship. Ms. Collina, born in Bologna, moved to Morocco about 25 years ago after converting to Islam and marrying Zaghba's father. She gave birth to her son there in 1995. The two returned to Italy in 2015 after Zaghba failed two university exams in Morocco.

In 2014 when Ms. Collina and her son still lived in Morocco she noticed that he had an Islamic State flag on his Facebook profile. He told her he wanted to go to Syria.

"He'd say to me, 'That's pure Islam, I'm going to go there,'" Ms. Collina said. "But I never thought he wanted to go to Syria to fight and even less that he would do a terrorist attack."

Once they moved to Italy, she said, Zaghba told her he preferred how she dressed in Morocco, where she wore a face covering known as a niqab that left only a narrow opening for her eyes. Another time he scolded her because a small bit of her pants could be seen under her long robes, Ms. Collina said.

In March 2016, Italian police stopped Zaghba at the Bologna airport with a one-way ticket to Istanbul. They found Islamic State propaganda on his phone and his mother told them her son wanted to reach Syria. Antiterrorism agents searched her house, taking away a tablet computer, documents, cellphones and phone cards.

But the authorities lacked sufficient evidence to hold Zaghba and had to release him after a few hours. They took away his passport and continued to monitor his movements, but couldn't expel him because he was an Italian citizen. About a month later, a court-appointed attorney helped him get his passport back, and almost immediately he departed for London.

It was there, according to Ms. Collina, that her son underwent the radicalization that would lead to the terrorist attack, specifically at the gym where Zaghba met Khuram Butt, another of the London Bridge attackers.

"He had his politics and I had mine," his mother said. "He believed in ISIS and I tried to show him what they do is wrong."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170616ed6g0001g
