U.S.
Demonstrators in Streets, and at Airports, Protest Immigration Order

By NIRAJ CHOKSHI and NICHOLAS FANDOS 
771 words
30 January 2017
04:07
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Demonstrators turned out in force and on short notice at rallies across the country on Sunday to condemn President Trump’ executive order restricting immigration.

Protesters amassed in public spaces and at airports to oppose the order, which they assailed as un-American, even as the administration defended it as crucial to improving national security. The executive order, signed on Friday, stranded travelers around the world over the weekend and caused widespread confusion.

In Washington, protesters gathered by the thousands outside the front lawn of the White House to show their disgust with Mr. Trump’ decision and their solidarity with Muslims.

“hame,”hey chanted, hoisting homemade signs toward the Executive Mansion, where Mr. Trump was scheduled to spend part of the day making telephone calls to foreign leaders and later hosting a private screening of “inding Dory,”n animated film about a fish who travels the ocean in hopes of reuniting with its family.

“o hate, no fear,”he protesters added later. “efugees are welcome here.”

One more shot as marchers proceed Capitol-ways and toward Trump International Hotel pic.twitter.com/1AJ3RGMjXg —icholas Fandos (@npfandos) January 29, 2017

Among the protesters were some former Obama administration appointees.

Matt Nosanchuk, who served as the White House’ liaison to the Jewish community under President Barack Obama from 2013 to 2016, said on Sunday that he had been in touch with several former colleagues as they made plans to attend the hastily arranged protest and ran into others in the crowd.

“hat Trump may not realize is you have a whole cadre of Obama appointees who are really good organizers, who have been activated and who are not going to stand by,”e said.

Security fencing and reviewing stands still in place from Inauguration Day kept crowds at a distance from the White House but did not stop the numbers from swelling through the afternoon, when the protesters left to march to Capitol Hill.

As marchers passed the Trump International Hotel in Washington, boos and profanities filled Pennsylvania Avenue. Elsewhere in the city, protesters carrying signs and candles marched up the sidewalk opposite the vice president’ house, most walking silently and many with children.

That Pennsylvania Ave hotel? Protesters like it, too. pic.twitter.com/B3i9c9Jseb —icholas Fandos (@npfandos) January 29, 2017

At a rally in Battery Park in Lower Manhattan, thousands gathered in protest as nearby ferries shuttled visitors to the Statue of Liberty and Ellis Island.

Asma Shuaib, 22, a student from Jackson Heights, Queens, and a Muslim, said she had come to resist the president’ executive order.

Through tears, she disavowed violence in the name of Islam and paraphrased the Prophet Muhammad: “f you see something that you believe in your heart is wrong, you must speak out, and then act.”

For over an hour, speakers including Senators Chuck Schumer and Kirsten E. Gillibrand of New York, Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, Mayor Bill de Blasio and immigrant activists addressed the peaceful crowd amid chants of “o ban, no wall,”“et them in”nd “mpeach.”

As they did elsewhere in the country, lawyers stood in the international arrivals terminal of San Francisco International Airport, holding up signs offering free assistance to those awaiting the arrival of family members from countries affected by the Trump administration’ order.

Several thousand protesters, accompanied by a brass band and drummers, paraded past check-in counters, chanting, “ay it loud, say it clear, refugees are welcome here!”

This is the scene outside Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport right now https://t.co/quli4Uei65 —ernanda Santos (@fernandaNYT) January 29, 2017

In Arizona, which has taken more Syrian refugees than any other state, a few hundred protesters greeted travelers arriving at the busiest terminal at Phoenix Sky Harbor International Airport, their signs facing the street, visible to anyone who drove in. Many motorists honked, some to the beat of whatever slogan the crowd was chanting at the time.

With a megaphone, Orlando Arenas, 33, kept everyone going. “ell me what community looks like,”e said, and the protesters answered, “his is what community looks like.”

Reporting was contributed by Thomas Fuller, Eric Lipton, Fernanda Santos and Jonathan Wolfe.

* Travelers Stranded and Protests Swell Over Trump Order

* Trump’ Immigration Order Jolts Iraqis, U.S.’ Top Allies Against \b ISIS\b0 

* As Democrats Take to the Streets, Lawmakers Rush to Keep Up

* Refugee Ban Endangers ‘art of American Legacy’

* Rulings on Trump’ Immigration Order Are First Step on a Long Legal Path

Document NYTFEED020170130ed1u001e1
