FEATURE
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The War Without And the War Within

By CAELAINN HOGAN 
5,034 words
13 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
36
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

On a hazy morning this spring, at the entrance of the Al-Bayrouni cancer center in northeast Damascus, a wall of tires teetered atop a long mound of dirt. Where there were no tires, jagged sheets of metal or rusting barrels had been propped up to create a makeshift shield. The edges of the flat roof were lined with barrels and sandbags. The 500-bed facility, the biggest oncology hospital in Syria, stands on the edge of an old highway, near the Al-Assad and Harasta suburbs, overlooking an active front line between government and opposition forces. As the engines of passing warplanes sucked at the air overhead, soldiers patrolled the grounds. For the government, the highway is a direct supply line to the police hospital and barracks beside the cancer center. For the opposition, controlling the road would provide them a chance to break a siege that has left most medical facilities destroyed or empty.

From the guard's bunker, the face of Bashar al-Assad surveyed those arriving through dark aviator glasses. Throughout the hospital, too, Assad's face beamed down from framed portraits hung on nearly every ward. In the front lobby, Syrian and Palestinian flag bunting was draped from wall to wall. On the side of the building that faced the front line, many wards lay empty, scattered with unplugged monitoring machines, unwound bandages and creased bedsheets. Divots in corridors marked where shrapnel had knocked chunks of plaster from the walls. A wad of chewing gum had been stuck across a crack in a pane of glass. The army had soldiers stationed on the hospital's top floor; young men with guns slung over their shoulders paced the halls there, while a gaggle of white-uniformed nurses sat in a room nearby. One made a heart shape with her hands and blew a kiss at a rose-framed picture of the president. With the medical staff now outnumbering the patients, her days at the hospital were boring, she complained.

That day, like most days in recent months, the rainbow row of colored seats leading to the ward for children with cancer were almost all empty. Most of the mothers and fathers who did make it to this waiting area had faced a harrowing choice: Travel with their children along a road they knew had been the target of mortar fire, to a hospital that overlooked a front line; or stay put and pray the conflict would soon end, knowing that the disease could be spreading through the bodies of their children. Some of the parents had to leave their other children behind in cities being bombed, unable to see them for months, living alone in shelters and cheap hotels so their sick children could get treatment. One woman from Raqqa told me she paid thousands of Syrian pounds to a smuggler to walk by foot with her months-old baby, across terrain strewn with mines -- afraid that if they were caught she would be beheaded, but knowing that if they stayed, her newborn son would die from the cancer.

In one room, the lighter-fluid stench of chemotherapy clung to a girl's spindly body like a cloud. The shaking of the walls, as airstrikes found their mark nearby, couldn't shift the smell; it left a rusty taste in the mouth, stung the eyes. The 9-year-old was sitting up in bed, a blue blanket pulled over her legs. Her eyes were set intensely on the pen in her hand, drawing the round outline of a smiley face, next to shaky letters that spelled out her name: Shahd.

Shahd had grown accustomed to the sound of bombings. In east Damascus, the front line of the battle between government forces and the opposition had fluctuated since she arrived two months earlier. Her head was fuzzy bald, though her eyebrows remained. When she smiled -- mouth wide open, like the face she'd drawn on the page -- her teeth glinted a translucent gray, blackened by the intensity of the treatment. Shahd knew she was sick, but her mother had never spoken the word ''cancer'' to her. The diagnosis was Ewing's sarcoma, a rare form of cancer occurring in bones and soft tissue. A tumor on the eighth vertebrae of her spine restricted the movement of her legs. By the time she reached the hospital, Shahd's cancer had spread throughout her body. But over more than five journeys back and forth between the hospital and her home for chemo, some of the cancer had retreated and shrunk. She even regained some sensation in her legs. As long as they could still reach the hospital, her mother felt she still had control over her daughter's disease.

Seven-year-old Fatima Hadeed, a leukemia patient, had come from ISIS-held Raqqa; she sat on her bed in a swaddle of pink duvet, quietly watching everything around her as the orange chemo liquid flowed steadily from an IV bag. Damaged veins ran like strikes of lightning along the tops of her hands and up the soft fleshy skin of her inner arms. Just over a month earlier, she shared the room with 9-year-old Samar Hatabi, who grew up in Aleppo, in one of the now-gutted neighborhoods on the eastern side of the city. Samar also had leukemia. When she wasn't wearing the heavy-fringed wig that she put on to go outside, the short hairs sprouting from her bald head heralded the return of a widow's peak. The girls' parents would sometimes chat about the treatments their children were undergoing. They avoided speaking of what was happening in the cities they had left behind.

Throughout the ward, mothers sat sentry beside each bed. They had come from all over Syria to the front line just for this, to hold the hands of their children and stay with them, sleeping on pullout armchairs. At Children's University Hospital, in the Mezze neighborhood of Damascus, parents were not allowed to stay in the rooms. There was no space.

The children receiving treatment at Al-Bayrouni no longer reacted to the rattling windows and walls after each strike. Instead they talked about the things that young kids usually do: The last time they were in school. Their favorite hobbies. What they wanted to be when they grew up. The parents showed me photos from when their children still had hair. The eyes and the corners of the mouth matched up, but there was a vast distance between then and now. The cancer had worn down the children and claimed parts for itself.

The country where they have grown up has also been stripped of what their parents used to cherish. It is barely recognizable but still theirs. When airstrikes hit nearby, a woman reassured Shahd and the other children that it was the government. ''It is us,'' she stressed. ''It's normal, it's us.'' I wondered what that ''us'' meant to these families, who had come from both sides of the front lines.

In Syria these days, people talk about a ''cancer of fears.'' They blame the tumors in the bodies of their children on the traumas of war: on the daily fear of government airstrikes and opposition attacks; on the fumes breathed in from the use of dirty fuel since the oil fields were taken over by ISIS; on bodies weakened and warped from shortages of food. Many fear that even if the war ends, the conflict will mark the health of future generations. The effects of the carcinogenic materials used in the war will most likely only be reflected in Syrian cancer rates years down the line. An oncologist working in a clinic in besieged Eastern Ghouta, the site of chemical attacks, already reported significantly rising rates of cancer in her patients.

The fear of the parents at Al-Bayrouni -- that the war was the cause of their children's cancers -- is hard to prove or disprove. But the effects of the war on treatment and survival rates are clear. Delays in treatment can quicken progression and worsen outcomes. With cancer, after all, timing can be everything. If caught early, roughly 70 percent of patients with Ewing's sarcoma, the rare cancer Shahd was fighting, are alive five years later; but after the disease has spread, that figure drops to around 30 percent. For the most common form of childhood leukemia, five-year remission rates can reach 85 percent, but this can depend on its stage at diagnosis and how rapidly the cancer responds to treatment. The six-year conflict has claimed the lives of more than 300,000 Syrians, but as of 2014, 200,000 more have died from chronic diseases, including cancer. Of the millions who have fled the country, an estimated 27,000 were skilled physicians, more than half the total number of medical doctors who worked in the country before the conflict. Half the nation's hospitals and health centers have been destroyed, in many cases deliberately.

The Al-Bayrouni cancer center once received as many as 1,400 patients a day. Doctors there had high hopes of expanding the center, but now most of the beds lie empty, with wards damaged by shelling abandoned. After years of conflict, most hospitals, including Al-Bayrouni, face shortages of medicines and medical equipment, as well as a limited number of oncology professionals. The Ministry of Health's national cancer registry has reported that this year an estimated 25,000 new cancer patients will be in need of treatment. But the actual number of cancer patients is very likely much higher, possibly up to three times that number, because of disruptions in the registry's reporting and the mass displacement of people. In Damascus, oncology facilities have been overwhelmed, with patients coming from all over Syria to the capital. The Syrian government provides anticancer medicine free of charge in its public oncology facilities, but since the war began, these are not always available. Wars are expensive, and so the health budget has repeatedly been cut. The World Health Organization, according to a report it published in April, needs almost $7 million in the coming year to increase access to treatment for Syria's cancer patients. People who must procure medicine or medical supplies on their own turn to private pharmacies or black-market traders. But since the war began, the average salary of working Syrians has plummeted to around $70 a month. The cost of a single course of chemo can be equivalent to a year's salary.

These days, even the provision of health care has become politicized. American brand medicines once on the shelves of hospital pharmacies are now imported from government allies like Iran. Areas under siege are often cut off from medical supplies, and the only hospitals fully equipped to treat cancer patients are in government-controlled places, meaning free treatment is readily available to only those who can safely enter those areas.

Every day, a bus takes up to a dozen cancer patients from the Bab Al Hawa Hospital, the largest in opposition-held Syria, across to Turkey. The border is open to those with a medical referral, but only 30 people with chronic diseases like cancer are allowed per day. The waiting list is months long. Before the war, most would have gone to Damascus for treatment. But fear of the disease's progressing competes with the fear many have of going to a government-run facility, knowing that they came from opposition areas. Some recount stories of patients arrested while trying to reach government hospitals or made to pay bribes at each checkpoint.

In Gaziantep, a sprawling Turkish city, I visited a hostel that has been set up specifically for Syrians battling cancer in exile. A 35-year-old tailor named Jaber Abu Ali described the journey he took across the border every 20 days from opposition-held Idlib for chemo. He was not able to bring his pregnant wife and two young children across, so he had to go back and forth for treatment. Both he and his friend at the hostel, a 25-year-old named Ehsan Barakat, said it was impossible to seek treatment in Damascus. Ehsan traveled all the way from Dara'a, the birthplace of the revolution, to Turkey for treatment, even though Al-Bayrouni was only a few hours' drive from his home. On the way, he was captured by ISIS for one day. He had to pay a smuggler $200 to take him around government-held areas. Ehsan was hopeful that his thyroid cancer would be cured, but Ali was facing what seemed like an impossible battle. When I asked where his cancer had spread, Ali's hand rested on his abdomen, his side, his chest, his rib cage: The cancer was in his colon, his kidneys, his lungs. There was never cancer in his family before, he said. He blamed the war.

The risk of traveling in Syria had complicated treatment for almost everyone. Early on, as the war shifted and metastasized, roads became lifelines between different territories, crucial thruways of communication and control. Opposition forces were constantly trying to take over sections that connected the main bastions of government control. When fighting intensified, checkpoints often closed. Patients who were on buses, sick from chemo, were stuck for hours in the cold and in the heat, delirious from fatigue and fear, pain rippling through their bodies. Even for people in Harasta, in neighborhoods that had been under siege for years, it sometimes seemed impossible to reach Al-Bayrouni, though it was just a few minutes up the road.

The day I met Shahd, she had finally been told that she could go home after a two-week stay at the hospital. She had completed the round of chemo within a few days, but it had taken longer than usual for her to gain enough strength for the journey back to her home in Tartus, a government-held city on the Mediterranean coast, three hours north by car. Her cancer was advanced, which gave her a lower chance of ever being cured. But the treatment reduced the pain and the spread of the disease and could give her years more with her family. Even the slimmest of chances was worth the journey for her mother, Sabah.

When it was time to leave, a nurse pulled the blue curtain around Shahd's bed, and she and Sabah helped change the girl's clothes. They lifted Shahd gently into a wheelchair, her legs limp in front of her in baggy green pajamas. Sabah paced a small circle in heeled boots, making last arrangements over the phone for their trip. A man in army fatigues joined them, a cousin named Basel, who was stationed nearby. He wheeled Shahd down to a waiting car and lifted her into the back seat. The rumbles of the bombings in the distance continued as they sped off toward the sounds to catch a 1 p.m. bus.

Sabah had defied many people's advice in taking her daughter to Al-Bayrouni. Other parents at the hospitals in the city told her that terrorists were stationed along the edges of the road; they warned her that she could be shot on the way or blown up by a stray mortar shell. But Sabah had spent a month in Damascus waiting in crowded hospital hallways for her daughter to receive treatment. They were far from home, and she was close to losing hope. ''We decided we will go to Harasta, even if there are hundreds of terrorists,'' Sabah said. ''We can't wait much longer.'' They had made their first journey through a thick fog, watching the white blur of shapes pass by on the screen of Sabah's mobile phone, filming as the bus hurtled past the twisted frames of wrecked cars, like strange trees lining the road, afraid to watch with their own eyes.

For the family of Samar, the young leukemia patient from Aleppo, the ordeal began in July 2016. The girl's face began to turn yellow and then her walking became unsteady and painful. Her father, Ahmad, took her to the clinic run by the Red Crescent relief organization, next to the Aleppo University Hospital, where she stayed for more than two weeks for tests. When her leukemia was eventually confirmed, the doctors referred her to Basma, a support association for children with cancer, which operated the ward in the Al-Bayrouni hospital. The Al-Kindi Hospital in Aleppo, which used to be a top cancer center and a rival to Al-Bayrouni, had been destroyed in the war, occupied both by rebel and regime forces at different stages. It remained in the control of pro-government forces but was being used as a type of military base.

On Aug. 1, Ahmad and Samar's mother, Faiza, took Samar to Damascus. They gave her painkillers before the journey. For nine hours they traveled on a crowded bus. It had been a long time since they had left Aleppo, and the country they once knew now seemed almost entirely foreign. On the outskirts of their city, people displaced from the violence had set up camp in abandoned buildings. Bunkers piled with sandbags and checkpoints marked with oil barrels dotted the highway. They passed cities like Homs, whose decimation they had seen only in YouTube videos. At the time, the opposition forces controlled half of Aleppo, and in Harasta, pro-government airstrikes were hitting nearby. But Ahmad and Faiza had never questioned their decision to go to Damascus. Even though the roads were treacherous and the cost of traveling would leave their family nearly destitute, it was the only way to get the treatment their daughter needed.

In Damascus, they found themselves at Children's Hospital in Mezze, with its notorious overcrowding. Mezze is a mostly upmarket neighborhood, where the main public and university hospitals are situated, as well as a number of foreign embassies. The evening I visited the hospital, it was Mother's Day in Syria, and waiters in the upscale restaurants nearby were carrying cakes alight with sparklers to tables of gathered families. But on the ground floor of Children's Hospital, where the wards are too crammed for mothers to join their children, nearly 100 women were bedding down for the night. They stretched out on plastic chairs or curled atop thick blankets on the floor. By the elevators, they pressed their foreheads to the ground in prayer.

Faiza couldn't bear for Samar to stay there, so on their fourth day in the city, they made their first journey to Al-Bayrouni. They traveled back and forth every four or five days for the next five months. In between treatments, Samar's family shifted from one hotel to another, always desperate to find a cheaper room. They continued to pay rent for their apartment in Aleppo, where Samar's sister and brother remained. Ahmad was unemployed when Samar became sick; an injury had cost him his job at the local knitting factory. Ahmad and Faiza wanted to return to Aleppo, but they were afraid that if they did, the war would make it impossible for them to get back to Al-Bayrouni and Samar would miss her treatment. ''I refused to hear anything about what happened in Aleppo,'' Ahmad told me. ''If I heard someone talk about that, I would go away. We decided to not think of any other thing but our daughter.''

Fatima, Samar's roommate at Al-Bayrouni, lived less than a 10-minute drive from Children's Hospital, in the district of Mezze 86. It is a neighborhood of mainly Alawites, the Shia sect that Assad belongs to, but a far cry from the upscale houses closer to downtown. People from some of the wealthier areas of the city would most likely call it a slum. In the dappled light of their living room, Fatima's mother, a petite 34-year-old named Mediyah, scrolled through her phone for updates on the situation in Harasta.

Her daughter was barely a year old when the revolution began in Syria. It was the girl's grandmother, also named Fatima, who first noticed that the girl, then 6, was sick. At a local clinic in Raqqa, the doctor ran a blood test and suspected leukemia. It took a month to get a full diagnosis. The grandmother was determined that the girl be taken to Damascus for treatment. By the time she left her home with her uncle, Fatima's round little face was turning yellow.

Fatima and her uncle traveled by bus in the opposite direction from Damascus, through ISIS territory, to the heavily bombed, opposition-held border town of Azaz, where refugees cross to Turkey. Then they took another bus to Aleppo, Fatima weak and in pain, and crossed front lines to government-held territory. It took them a week to get to Damascus. Fatima was close to death when they arrived. Mediyah followed soon after, when it was clear her daughter would have to remain in Damascus. After a five-hour bus ride to another town, she took an airplane operated by a private donor that sometimes helped transport cancer patients and their relatives to the capital. ''My husband promised me he will try to come here,'' Mediyah said. ''It's too expensive here; he couldn't come right away.''

Over the first month, Mediyah and Fatima's uncle took the girl to the hospital a dozen times as an outpatient. When they realized it would be too difficult to travel back to Raqqa, Mediyah found the apartment in Damascus and the girl's grandmother joined them. Both women refused to speak about how they had managed to get out of Raqqa, ISIS's de facto capital. They declined even to speak the caliphate's name, only acknowledging there were ''armed groups'' there. Relatives abroad, they told me, had sent money to help them make the journey and to survive in Damascus. They wouldn't say anything about the men in their family, not the men's jobs or what they had done during the war. Both women became panicked and tight-lipped whenever the subject was raised.

The doctors had said it would take five years to consider Fatima cured of the leukemia. Her regular trips to the hospital would gradually decrease, dwindling to only a checkup every few months, but until Fatima was given the all-clear and Mediyah felt her daughter was safe, she was determined to stay in Damascus.

Mediyah tried to calculate in her head the number of times over the last eight months that she has taken Fatima to Al-Bayrouni, but she gave up after a few minutes and shrugged. On the days Fatima needed to be at the hospital for treatment, Mediyah took a local bus to a minivan to a point where they could transfer again for a short but tense drive to the hospital. Sometimes there was shelling on the highway. ''The war is easier on me than the sickness of my child,'' she said. On their last trip, the bus drove very fast, speeding through the checkpoints because of the fighting. It still took them an hour and a half to reach the hospital. And yet she preferred the journey to the front lines than going to the busy wards in Damascus. Despite the airstrikes around the hospital, she and Fatima felt at home there. Fatima recognized the doctors and the nurses. She could go to the art room to draw sometimes, when she was feeling strong enough. Mediyah could sleep beside her bed at night.

While Fatima and Mediyah were at Al-Bayrouni, the elderly Fatima cared for the five other children, sometimes for more than a week at a time. When they were all together in the apartment in Mezze, they rarely went out, except to go to the shops for food or to the pharmacies for Fatima's treatment. When I visited them at their home, all six children, three boys and three girls, sat together on a mattress on the floor. The youngest was only a year and a half old; the oldest was 14, a quiet boy who looked small for his age. Fatima sat with a bright wool hat over her smooth head, looking taller out of the hospital bed, her legs akimbo in jeans and sneakers, jostling with the siblings who sat with her. The window beside them faced the wall of another building, with electric wires hanging low over the narrow lane.

By the summer, the cost of living there was impossible for the family to afford. They gathered their belongings again to travel to Tabqa, a city recently reclaimed from ISIS. There, Fatima's father was waiting for them. Though the streets were still littered with rubble, bodies buried beneath, it was close to the place they considered home.

In May, after months of silence, a WhatsApp message came from Sabah, who was back home in Tartus. ''Shahd died,'' the message read. Shahd would have turned 10 in two weeks. She died on the ward at Al-Bayrouni, her mother at her side.

They had made the journey back to the hospital three times over those months. After each chemo session, Shahd would lose her appetite completely, her body weakening. As she lost strength, the tumors in her body made gains. ''The cancer reached all the way to her brain,'' Sabah said. In the final weeks, Shahd slipped into a coma. The Alawites believe that each person is born from a star and will return again to the sky, after taking many forms here on Earth. Though her daughter's departure left a hollow pit inside her, Sabah took strength from her belief that she would be reborn. ''I wish for that,'' she said. ''I'm waiting for her return.''

Shahd's body was taken to a plot of land owned by her father's family in a rural area far from their home, surrounded by mountainous forests, near the sea. Shahd was buried on the edge of a field that lay in the shade of tall oaks and the delicate boughs of walnut trees. There is no threat of violence on the road there, and Sabah and her surviving daughters can visit her without fear.

Not every parent who lost a child to cancer at the hospital had the chance to take that child home to be buried. Samar, who had sometimes shared Fatima's room, died on the last day of January. She was buried just south of Damascus. When I visited Faiza and Ahmad in Aleppo, empty fields and even the stretch of a salt lake were dotted with the angular skeletons of buildings and the twisted frames of burned-out cars, punctuated by tanks or military bunkers. Less than three months earlier, after a brutal siege, east Aleppo was reclaimed by the Syrian Army, and when I arrived, families were picking their way through the streets, returning to collapsing buildings that used to be homes.

Ahmad met me outside the doorway of a lightless building downtown. A grassy verge opposite the house was a crooked skyline of scattered headstones in the dark, one of the improvised graveyards throughout the city. The family had moved from east Aleppo five years ago, their neighborhood besieged, their house eventually destroyed. Up two flights of a concrete stairwell, Ahmad sat on the carpeted floor of their small rental apartment with Faiza and their 20-year-old son, Abdulsalam, and 22-year-old daughter, Aisha. In Ahmad's hands was a lilac plastic bag, crisscrossed with creases from being folded and unfolded. One by one, he gingerly removed pieces of paper from the bag, the records that documented the last months of his daughter's life. From a shelf, Faiza pulled out a dusty black plastic bag and removed two of Samar's pink school bags. On an old mobile phone that she used as a photo album, she scrolled through pictures of her daughter in Damascus: Samar grinning in a park, her hip cocked and her hand on her waist, a glossy black bob wig on her head.

In the last days of her life, Samar could not walk, so Ahmad carried her wherever they went. They would take a bus to the hospital; they took a taxi only once, on the last day of her life, when she became so ill she was choking for air. ''She couldn't breathe anymore, she couldn't breathe alone,'' he said. Ahmad cupped his palms around his phone and showed me the last photo he took of his daughter. She was laid out on a hospital table, a small cocoon he could scoop easily in his arms, her small, sunken face wrapped in a delicate white shroud.

Ahmad was saving money to travel back to Damascus, to visit his daughter's grave. A week after my visit with him, I went and saw it myself. It was in a brand-new section of a martyrs' cemetery that opened several years ago to provide cheaper graves to meet the demand for burial space since the war. A bare plot marked Samar's final resting place. There was no headstone, only a number, which Ahmad had memorized by heart, just as he remembered her age: 9 years, 22 days.

Caelainn Hogan lives in Dublin. She has written for Harper's Magazine, The New Yorker and Vice.

(MM36-MM37); Fatima Hadeed, 7, in the apartment where her family lives in the Mezze 86 neighborhood of Damascus. (MM38); Mothers waiting topass the security checkpoint to enter Children's Hospital in Damascus. (MM39); Young patients at Children's Hospital. (MM40-MM41); Sabah Abrahem and her 9-year-old daughter, Shahd Ghareb, who was fighting Ewing's sarcoma, prepare to leave the Al-Bayrouni cancer center in Harasta after receiving a chemotherapy treatment. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SEBASTIÁ LISTE/NOOR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (MM42-MM43) 

Document NYTF000020170813ed8d0006z

