Business
CMO Today: TV Takes On Digital; McDonald's Says Sorry for Dead Dad Ad; Target 's Online Rethink; Here's your morning roundup of the biggest marketing, advertising and media industry news and happenings.

By Lara O'Reilly 
968 words
16 May 2017
16:18
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning. It's day two of the upfronts and the language is getting battle-like. We'll see if ESPN and ABC one-up the competition today.

Fox shows its teeth

YouTube spent much of its "NewFront" last week throwing grenades on TV's lawn. This week it was time for TV to pick them up and hurl them back. My Wall Street Journal colleague Joe Flint was over at Fox's upfront, where  the network announced a slate of entertainment shows  from veteran producers and a live staging of "Rent" in the hope of turning around declining ratings. Fox Networks' new ad sales chief, Joe Marchese , delivered the punches, muting his microphone to joke that ads are better with the sound on, saying Fox has five times the ad minutes as social networks, and touting its brand safety credentials. Even "Family Guy" creator Seth MacFarlane got in on the act , quipping that YouTube ads have been delivered next to "ISIS vids." Mr. MacFarlane's most risky joke of the night, however, was when he introduced Fox execs Dana Walden and Gary Newman on stage as "the only people at Fox not being sued."

NBC goes for the jugular

At its own presentation on Monday, NBC "went straight for Google's jugular,"  AdExchanger reported. Its chairman of ad sales, Linda Yaccarino , referenced YouTube 's brand safety woes, touted TV as "the most effective advertising means there is," and denigrated the ability of algorithms to be able to predict the popularity of TV shows like "This Is Us." Both NBC and Fox also used their upfronts to announce they will be using the "Video Quality Score" metric from analytics firm Moat across all their linear and on-demand programming. What else happened at the NBC upfront? Confetti cannons, Megyn Kelly, Jennifer Lopez, a performance from Jennifer Hudson, and the cast of "Will & Grace." My CMO Today colleague Alexandra Bruell tweeted: "[Overheard] at NBC Upfront: do you feel like you just got sucked into a portal to the 90s?"

McSorry

It'd be fascinating to understand what goes through the minds of a creative agency that suggests the subject of child bereavement would be a novel way to sell burgers—nd the marketer that signs off on it. You know where to find me, McDonald's and Leo Burnett. The fast food chain apologized on Monday for the "upset" its latest British TV ad caused , the BBC reported. The spot depicts a boy trying to work out what he had in common with his dead father, before discovering they were both huge Filet-o-Fish fans (doubly offensive and unrealistic in my book). U.K. ad regulator, the Advertising Standards Authority, tells me it is currently assessing the 100 or so complaints it has received from viewers, who say it is "inappropriate and insensitive" to use bereavement and grief to sell fast food. In response, McDonald's said it was merely trying to "highlight the role McDonald's has played in our customers' everyday lives -- both in good and difficult times." Give me a break. Drop the faux-sensitivity and show people with happy faces, saying "mmm" as they munch on a Big Mac.

On Target

Target is rethinking its digital strategy  after issuing a bleak profit warning, WSJ reports. "We're not trying to be the catalog of everything," said Target 's digital chief, Mike McNamara . The online "catalog of everything" category was won long ago by Amazon , and Wal-Mart is beating Target on the physical retail front, having lowered prices and refurbished its stores. The article details how Target 's e-commerce strategy has been somewhat of a mess to date: Potential acquisition talks have gone nowhere, its in-house startup developing a marketplace for third-party sellers was scrapped, a partnership with an app for picking up orders outside stores was dissolved, and important marketing and strategy executives have left the company. It appears Target 's digital initiatives now mostly focus around getting to a place that users already expect it to be at, including developing a new curbside-pickup service and speeding up shipments. But the retailer might do better to focus on providing higher-margin products and experiences consumers can't find anywhere else online.

Best of the rest

The former CEO of Paramount Pictures, Brad Grey, has died at the age of 59 from cancer. Mr. Grey led the Viacom -owned studio for 12 years, until February of this year. [ WSJ ]

The chairman of the Association of Hispanic Advertising Agencies said marketers are pulling back from targeting U.S. Latinos because they are worried about offending what the association calls "racist" supporters of President Donald Trump . [ Financial Times ]

Apple is on the hunt for a programming chief, which could mean the entertainment giant wants to step up the creation of its own shows and movies. [ The Information ]

Disney CEO Bob Iger said hackers claim to have stolen one of its upcoming movies and are demanding a ransom, or else they threaten to leak it online. Mr. Iger said Disney is refusing to pay and is working with federal investigators. [ Hollywood Reporter ]

Facebook has been fined €50,000 ($165,616) by the French privacy watchdog, which said the social network's 2015 privacy policy breached its data collection rules. [ WSJ ]

About Us

Follow us on Twitter : @wsjCMO , @larakiara , @VranicaWSJ , @JackMarshall , @alexbruell , @srabil , @asharma ,

Subscribe to our morning newsletter, delivered straight to your inbox, at http://on.wsj.com/CMOTodaySignup .

Write to Lara O'Reilly at lara.oreilly@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170516ed5g003bh
