U.S.
American Service Member Dies in Explosion Outside Mosul

By HELENE COOPER 
305 words
30 April 2017
00:46
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n American service member was killed in an explosion on Saturday near Mosul, Iraq, the Pentagon said, as part of the battle to drive Islamic State fighters out of their last major stronghold in the country.

The United States Central Command did not identify the service member, pending notification of the family. A Central Command statement said that “ U.S. service member died from wounds sustained in an explosive device blast outside of Mosul, Iraq.”

American service members have been getting closer to the fighting in Iraq as Iraqi security forces have been engaged in urban warfare in West Mosul, where Islamic State fighters have had almost three years to dig into entrenched positions.

Iraqi civilians and soldiers, as well as militants, have suffered a number of deaths and injuries from mines and roadside bombs in East Mosul and West Mosul.

Saturday’ American casualty was the third this past week in the fight against the Islamic State. On Wednesday, two American soldiers were killed in Afghanistan during a raid on ISIS fighters. Pentagon officials said they might have been struck by friendly fire.

The Defense Department on Friday identified the soldiers, both of them Army Rangers, as Sgt. Joshua Rodgers, 22, and Sgt. Cameron Thomas, 23, deployed from Fort Benning, Ga. A third soldier was wounded in the operation, which targeted the “mir”f Islamic State militants in Afghanistan, Defense Department officials said.

The Mosul death is the second American military fatality since the fight to regain the city began last year. In October, a Navy chief petty officer, Jason C. Finan, 34, of Anaheim, Calif., was killed as a roadside bomb exploded north of the city.

* ‘riendly Fire’ay Have Killed 2 U.S. Soldiers in Afghanistan Raid

Document NYTFEED020170429ed4t005eh
