THE THREAD
Magazine Desk; SECTMM
The 7.23.17 Issue

737 words
6 August 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
9
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

RE: MOSUL

James Verini wrote about life in Mosul during Iraq's campaign to retake the city from ISIS.

This is the sort of deep journalism only possible with the resources of an established news organization with highly trained professionals reporting, writing, photographing and producing. The details and places in this piece drive home again the incalculable cost of the political decision made by the United States 14 years ago to invade and occupy Iraq without international support, without invitation and especially without any clear idea of how much and how long that decision would continue to affect the United States and its interests. Ralph Begleiter, Ocean View, Del.

When America marched into Iraq with our big stick and whacked that giant hornets' nest, we did not pause to contemplate what comes after the heroic and satisfying act of whacking something. Well, some of us did, but we weren't the ones with the guns. We were armed with flimsy protest signs that bent and fluttered in the streets of Chicago, Madison, San Francisco, New York.

And now, as the gray dust of exploded cinder block drifts through Mosul, we're treated to beautiful, horrific reporting like this. My house is made of wood, not cinder block. My family's only real defense is a robust, serious and courageous democracy. I and others watch in horror at how quickly that defense can begin to crumble, and we wonder what's next. Our leader is a madman. Carl Whiting, Wheeler, Ore.

RE: ABORTION PILL

Ruth Graham wrote about the anti-­bortion movement's campaign to elevate ''abortion-­ill reversal.''

As obstetrician-­ynecologists, we are committed to supporting women in the decisions they make about their reproductive lives. We do this with the most up-to-date and rigorously tested scientific evidence. When it comes to women's health, patients deserve the very best information upon which to base their decisions. The hypothetical possibility of an ''abortion-­ill reversal'' as promoted by Dr. George Delgado may have biological plausibility, but it does not meet this crucial standard of evidence-­ased care. This hypothesis would need to undergo rigorous scientific testing and quality peer review before it could be validly recommended to women. We would welcome a tested and proven method for helping the rare patient who changes her mind after initiating a medical abortion. But until so-­alled abortion-­ill reversal has undergone the same stringent study as any other medical therapy, offering it to women -- to say nothing of requiring their doctors to offer it -- is unethical at best and harmful at worst. Drs. Abigail Cutler, Aileen Gariepy, Meredith Pensak, and Nancy Stanwood, Section of Family Planning, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine

Women having personal agency over our lives and reproduction is essential to our dignity as full human beings. We call that being pro-­hoice. ''Choice'' is the operative word. If a woman has second thoughts after taking the first pill, this is a choice she can utilize to express that choice. It is her decision to make.

The problem comes when legislation denies women the ability to choose. Stripping women of our choice -- aside from being state intrusion into a very personal matter -- deeply infantilizes us, suggesting that we are not mature enough to make that very adult choice for ourselves, while also demanding that we take on the profoundly adult responsibilities of motherhood. Ellen Goldin, Brooklyn

I've had two abortions. The first time was because of birth-­ontrol failure; my diaphragm was not fitted properly. The second time was because of rape. Both occurred when I was 21. I am now 60. I have never regretted either abortion. In fact, I have always felt very grateful that I was able to get safe, legal, affordable abortions a few years after Roe v. Wade.

If women change their minds and want to reverse the process, that's their choice. I had no doubt or uncertainty doing it, and I felt only relief as soon as I knew it was done. It's all about choice. Demand for reversals doesn't mean women really don't want to have abortions. They just want the right to change their mind. Shelley Diamond, San Francisco

Send your thoughts to magazine@nytimes.com.

(PHOTOGRAPH BY PETER VAN AGTMAEL) DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY GIACOMO GAMBINERI) 

Document NYTF000020170806ed860007m
