First Words
Magazine
How ‘n-American’ecame the Political Insult of the Moment

By BEVERLY GAGE 
1,632 words
21 March 2017
10:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Conservatives have long complained that “ don’ recognize my country anymore.”n Trump’ America, though, it’ liberals who see something insufficiently, well, American. Issues once assumed to be settled —he desirability of racial tolerance, a general preference for democratic processes —ow appear, suddenly and ominously, to be up for debate. For many, this has created a sense of rupture, a disconnect between what they had assumed would be happening at this moment in history and what is actually taking place —s if the 2016 election shifted the nation into some dystopian reality that was never meant to be.

This, at least, is the feeling reflected in the growing popularity of a word once used to browbeat liberals and leftists. Today’ White House, according to Trump’ critics, is not only wrongheaded or meanspirited but “n-American.”

“merica is a nation of immigrants,”ruce Springsteen declared  from a stage in Australia in the wake of Trump’ first travel ban. “nd we find this antidemocratic and fundamentally un-American.”hen the White House introduced a revised version of the order earlier this month, the newly chosen Democratic National Committee chairman, Tom Perez, warned that “his ban on Muslims is just as dangerous and un-American as the last one.”thers have invoked the word to assail the president’ name-calling, attacks on judges and contempt for the media. “his White House does not seem to value an independent press,”CNN ’ Jake Tapper declared  last month. “here is a word for that line of thinking. The word is un-American.”

This line of attack remains just as popular on the right, and Trump staff members have been quick to use it. On the day after Trump’ speech to Congress, Sebastian Gorka, a deputy assistant to the president, called for unwavering support of the president’ initiatives on behalf of “mmigration crime”ictims: “f you object to that, you are in favor of pain, in favor of tragedy and in favor of chaos,”e told one interviewer, “nd that is un-American.”he president himself has joined in, too. “he real scandal here is that classified information is illegally given out by ‘ntelligence’ike candy,”e tweeted in mid-February, responding to accusations about his campaign’ ties to Russia. “ery un-American!”

The charge can come across as an empty one, ready to be attached to any given outrage. But its re-emergence reflects something far more serious about the state of national discourse. On the surface, “n-American”mplies consensus: It carries a punch only when everybody agrees what “merican”s. But the word has historically gained traction at moments when national consensus seems the most wobbly and uncertain. It signals an urgent desire to find something —nything —hat Americans can still agree on.

For Trump’ critics, it is aspirational, pointing toward an American dream of liberty and equality that has never quite been realized on the ground. For the administration, the word is a way of designating insiders and outsiders, the righteous and the nonrighteous, those who deserve the privileges of citizenship and those who do not. Coming from the White House, it also carries an implied threat: Those who are “n-American”—eakers, critics, reporters —ay need to be dealt with as “nemies of the people,”nother worrisome Trump phrase.

To label something “n-American”s to imagine America as it should have been or as it might yet be but not as it ever was. Far from bringing back a meaningless insult, the revival of the charge suggests that something very big is now at stake: not only the direction of federal policy or the partisan balance of power but America’ identity as a nation.

In his farewell speech, Barack Obama paid homage to “he beating heart of our American idea,”escribing how the promise of “reedom to chase our individual dreams”as long inspired the nation’ citizens. This notion —hat America is not simply another nation-state but an “dea”—s itself the big American idea, the “eating heart”f what’ known as American exceptionalism. It’ what allows Americans to label certain things un-American even when those things have existed for centuries within the territorial boundaries of the United States. “merica is capable of being un-American,”amented Richard Cahan, one of the authors of a recent book on Japanese internment — seemingly absurd claim but, within the exceptionalist tradition, an entirely plausible one.

Americans have been denouncing each other in this manner almost since the dawn of the republic. By the early 20th century, the accusation encompassed a vast and incoherent range of political convictions. “mericans are very fond of classing as un-American anything they don’ like,”he St. Louis Post-Dispatch complained in 1909, ticking off tariffs and trusts, prohibition and social drinking, boycotts and “he intimidation of workingmen”s just a few of the positions declared “n-American”y their opponents.

The First World War only raised the stakes of this rhetorical clash. In an attempt to mobilize a divided country, President Woodrow Wilson called for “00 percent Americanism,”ffectively marginalizing anyone not 100 percent on board with the war effort —ncluding thousands of German immigrants (whose noncitizenship made them candidates for internment) and antiwar dissenters like the Socialist leader Eugene Debs (who was sentenced to 10 years in prison under Wilson’ new Espionage Act). After the war, the impulse to enforce “mericanism”elped to justify deportation raids and the rapid growth of the Ku Klux Klan. By 1924, the same impulse had yielded the nation’ first comprehensive immigration law, which largely banned immigrants from Asia, Africa and the Middle East and restricted entry from the heavily Catholic and Jewish countries of southern and eastern Europe.

Throughout these years, the burgeoning civil liberties movement clung to “n-American”s a useful critique, insisting that restrictive speech and immigration laws violated essential American principles. By the 1930s, though, “n-American”ad begun to harden as a language of repression, not resistance. In 1938, the House of Representatives created its infamous Committee on Un-American Activities (HUAC). After brief forays into investigating domestic fascism, the committee focused almost exclusively on American communists, deemed dangerous both for their suspected ties to the Soviet Union and for their “n-American”deas about labor rights and racial equality.

The committee did target a few suspected spies, but HUAC’ tribunals served primarily to decimate the American left, creating an atmosphere in which communists and noncommunists alike feared expressing their political opinions. Even at the height of this conflict, though, a few dissenters held on to an alternate view. By 1948, one F.B.I. memo noted, some Americans were starting to see “he House Committee on Un-American Activities as being un-American, itself.”

For today’ Democratic leadership, this viewpoint appears to hold considerable appeal. In her now-notorious 2013 speech at Goldman Sachs , Hillary Clinton warned against demagogues who “lay on people’ fears”o promote their “ackward-looking”genda. “hey have to be rejected,”he declared, “ecause they are fundamentally un-American.”wo years later, Obama made a speech championing the children of undocumented immigrants: “hen I hear folks talking as if somehow these kids are different than my kids or less worthy in the eyes of God, that somehow they are less worthy of our respect and consideration and care, I think that’ un-American,”e said. “ think we should do better, because that’ how America was made.”

The problem, of course, is that this is not how America was made. As a point of strategy, it may behoove Democrats to embrace patriotic or nationalistic language —o insist that there is more than one way to make America great. As a matter of history, however, this tends to obscure the bitter and enduring conflicts of the past. During election season, many Democrats apparently believed their own story, assuming that Americans were too dedicated to the expansion of liberty to elect Donald Trump . His victory is a reminder that, despite the country’ fondness for aspirational rhetoric, our illiberal traditions have serious staying power, too.

Today’ Republicans seem to recognize this perfectly well. In the past three years, Attorney General Jeff Sessions has praised the 1924 immigration act as a matter of national self-preservation. Newt Gingrich has called for a revival  of HUAC to contend with ISIS sympathizers. And the Ku Klux Klan and American fascist movements have experienced levels of attention and influence not seen since before World War II. Trump complains that he is being subjected to “itch hunts”nd “cCarthyism”ut has advocated policies —ike a “egistry”or Muslims —hat hark back to the list-making and name-naming of the HUAC era.

For the president’ opponents, it may be comforting to believe that such policies are un-American. But as the editors of The St. Louis Post-Dispatch noted more than a century ago, “he things we hurry to denounce as un-American”re often “eculiarly and distinctly American.”

“ better and broader view,”hey concluded, “eems to be that these problems are of our own creation, and are to be solved only by ourselves.”

Sign up for our newsletter  to get the best of The New York Times Magazine delivered to your inbox every week.

Beverly Gage is a professor of American political history at Yale. She is the author of “he Day Wall Street Exploded: A Story of America in Its First Age of Terror”nd is currently writing a biography of the former F.B.I. director J. Edgar Hoover.

Illustration by Derek Brahney 

Document NYTFEED020170321ed3l002jr
