U.S. News: Republican Visa Bill Led to List of Nations in Travel Ban

By Joe Palazzolo   
508 words
7 February 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.   

White House officials had an answer ready when reporters asked how President Donald Trump chose the seven countries whose citizens he temporarily banned from entering the U.S.: He took his cues from the Obama administration.

President Trump's chief of staff, Reince Priebus, said in a recent appearance on NBC's "Meet the Press" that the places named in Mr. Trump's executive order on immigration and refugees were "identified by the Obama administration as the seven most dangerous countries in the world in regard to harboring terrorists and affirmed by Congress."

Sean Spicer, Mr. Trump's press secretary, repeated the claim during a news conference a week ago.

But most of the countries were first identified in legislation introduced by Republicans. The bill, which later passed Congress with bipartisan support, was aimed not at curbing immigration, but atpressuring European allies to share more terror-related intelligence.

The bill was signed by President Barack Obama in 2015. His Department of Homeland Security later added three more countries to the list, using criteria established by the new law.

A spokesman for the Trump White House said Mr. Obama "designated four of the countries when he signed the law and the other three" later on.

The story of how the seven majority-Muslim countries came to be in Mr. Trump's order begins with a 2014 bill introduced by then-Rep. Candice Miller, a Michigan Republican who retired from Congress this year. The bill sought to tighten the security of a U.S. program that allows citizens of the U.K., France and three dozen other nations to travel to the U.S. without a visa.

Reports of young Europeans streaming onto battlefields in Iraq and Syria to fight for ISIS or other terrorist organizations alarmed lawmakers, who worried returning fighters could exploit the visa-waiver program to travel undetected to the U.S., according to congressional aides.

Members of the House Homeland Security Committee were concerned countries participating in the visa-waiver program were withholding "vital terrorism data" from the Department of Homeland Security and the U.S. Intelligence community, according to a committee report on the bill.

Ms. Miller's bill forced countries to turn over intelligence about their citizens with suspected terrorist links or face suspension from the program, which allows eligible foreigners to travel to the U.S. after filling out an online questionnaire.

She introduced an amended version of the bill, which became the Visa Waiver Program Improvement and Terrorist Travel Prevention Act, the following year. Citizens from the 38 countries in the program who had made trips to Iran, Iraq, Sudan or Syria since 2011 would be ineligible to enter the U.S. without a visa.

The law didn't affect the travel of citizens from those seven nations to the U.S. They could still obtain a visa, until Jan. 27 when Mr. Trump signed his order.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170206ed2700014
