World News: U.S. Downs Drone in Southern Syria --- Confrontations with pro-regime forces are distracting from fight against  ISIS , U.S. says

By Dion Nissenbaum in Washington, Ben Kesling in Baghdad and Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut 
994 words
21 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

An American fighter jet shot down an Iranian-made armed drone on Tuesday after it flew toward U.S.-led coalition troops in southern Syria, the latest in a series of confrontations with pro-regime forces that the U.S. military says is diverting attention from the fight against Islamic State.

The downing of the drone marked the third time in two weeks the U.S. has brought down a pro-regime aircraft viewed as a threat to the coalition and Syrian fighters the U.S. is backing in the fight against Islamic State. It was the latest indication that American efforts to discourage Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his Iranian allies from challenging the U.S. have fallen short.

The new challenges to American power in Syria come as the U.S. seeks to deliver dual blows to Islamic State by forcing the extremist group, also known as ISIS, from its last two major urban strongholds, Raqqa, in Syria, and Mosul, in Iraq.

"We want to be focused on ISIS," said Col. Ryan Dillon, a Baghdad-based spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition. "Anything that distracts us, or takes our attention, or takes resources away from fighting ISIS is not helpful. We are doing a lot of things to get that back on track."

The shooting down of the drone on Tuesday came two days after a U.S. jet shot down a Syrian plane that had targeted American-backed forces on the ground, the first such incident in the six-year Syrian war.

On Monday, in response to the downing of the Syrian plane, Russia threatened to track American warplanes west of the Euphrates River in Syria.

The threat was followed by an immediate drop-off in U.S. airstrikes in Syria against Islamic State, as the U.S. military took time to assess the risks. After weeks of launching airstrikes that numbered in the double digits on a daily basis in Syria, the U.S. military said it carried out eight on Monday -- all of them near Raqqa.

The decrease in airstrikes was accompanied by a decision by Australia, a member of the U.S.-led coalition against Islamic State, to temporarily suspend its flights in Syria. There are 60 countries in the coalition.

The coalition also began using more advanced aircraft with better air defenses to fly missions in Syria, U.S. officials said.

In Tuesday's incident, the American military spotted the armed, Iranian-made Shahed 129 drone flying toward a small outpost in southeastern Syria used by coalition troops working with forces fighting Islamic State, the military said.

The U.S. pilot quickly shot down the Predator-sized drone, which was the same type as one downed two weeks ago after it dropped a dud munition near the same outpost. U.S. officials said they didn't know who was operating the drones, but said primary suspicion falls on Syria or Iran.

U.S. forces have also launched three airstrikes in recent weeks on Iranian-backed fighters supporting the Assad regime who the U.S. military said were threatening coalition forces. The encounters have ratcheted up tensions with the regime's two most important military backers, Russia and Iran.

U.S. officials said Tuesday that they were seeing no serious steps by Moscow to target American coalition pilots.

"Public statements aside, we have not seen the Russians do any actions that cause us concern," said Capt. Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman. "We have no reason to think that the Russians seek conflict with us."

While Moscow also said it would shut down a special military channel used to ensure that Russian and American planes operate safely in crowded airspace over Syria, U.S. officials said the lines of communication were still working on Tuesday.

Syria isn't the only place Moscow is testing the U.S. military. On Monday, a Russian fighter jet buzzed an American reconnaissance plane over the Baltic Sea, coming within 10 yards of the U.S. jet, according to a senior defense official.

Capt. Davis called that incident "unsafe," but said it was an exception, not the norm. Russia blamed the U.S. plane.

Uncertainty surrounding the administration's Syria policy may help explain why the Syrian military and its allies have pressed their attacks on American special operations forces and their local allies in an effort to test the limits of America's willingness to strike back, Western diplomats said.

"Damascus is trying to push the boundaries; this [U.S.] administration is so unpredictable they are testing the waters to see what the policy is," said a Western diplomat in the Middle East who represents a country that is part of the U.S.-led coalition. "The Obama administration was more predictable, and they were less willing to confront Damascus, and the regime engaged in much less risky behavior as a result."

The drone shot down on Tuesday was near al-Tanf in southeastern Syria. The area has become the focal point for U.S. efforts to counter Iran in Syria, with U.S.-backed rebels pushing north from al-Tanf to deprive Iran of an ability to ferry weapons and supplies to allies in Syria and Lebanon.

"Iran is playing an unhelpful role in Syria and elsewhere in the Middle East," Gen. Joe Dunford, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said Monday in Washington. "I think their major export is malign influence."

Iran already is fighting Islamic State in Syria, sending thousands of troops to back Mr. Assad's forces, although they have been accused of focusing more on rebel groups opposed to Mr. Assad's rule.

---

Gordon Lubold contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170621ed6l0002l
