World; Europe
Manchester Attack Changes the Conversation for Trump Trip

By MICHAEL D. SHEAR 
1,212 words
23 May 2017
10:54
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

JERUSALEM —resident Trump headed on Tuesday to Europe, where a devastating attack at a pop music concert in Manchester, England, grimly underscored his demand that Arab and Muslim countries drive extremists “ut of this earth”nd offered the first real test of how the president responds to a searing terror strike.

The second half of Mr. Trump’ foreign trip was intended to provide a platform for him to explain how his “merica First”ision would affect global trade, the war in Afghanistan, the Syrian civil war and the future of NATO and the European Union.

But the attack, for which the Islamic State on Tuesday claimed responsibility, seemed certain to scramble the rest of the trip.

White House officials said the president’ schedule would proceed as planned. But his interaction with the continent’ leaders will be dominated by an urgent discussion about the security of public spaces and the world’ response to extremism.

That shift in topic could play into Mr. Trump’ political agenda at home, where he has repeatedly called for more restrictions on refugees and immigrants. And it could help the president make the case to world leaders for a more aggressive pursuit of terrorists in their communities.

In a statement Tuesday morning, Mr. Trump called the bombing at the concert, which killed nearly two dozen people and wounded scores, a “ery horrible morning of death.”e called on nations around the world to unite against a “ragedy of epic proportions”esulting from terror attacks, and to act against those who commit acts of terror.

“his is what I’e spent these last few days talking about in our trip overseas,”r. Trump said after a meeting with Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority. “ur society can have no tolerance for this continuation of bloodshed. We cannot stand a moment longer for the slaughter of innocent people.”

Yaakov Peri, a former head of Shin Bet, the Israeli internal security service, said on Israeli television Tuesday morning that “he tragic attack in Manchester plays favorably for Trump, who in Saudi Arabia said that we will fight terror together.”

But the attack also poses some risks for Mr. Trump, whose responses to fast-moving events —ometimes dashed off in a Twitter message with a hashtag and an exclamation point —an sound off-key. In his first comments Tuesday morning, Mr. Trump used a playground epithet to describe people like the assailant in the bombing.

“ will call them from now on losers, because that’ what they are,”r. Trump said after the meeting with Mr. Abbas. “hey’e losers. And we’l have more of them. But they’e losers. Just remember that.”

The Manchester bombing adds to the distraction that Mr. Trump already faces as he makes his debut as America’ ambassador to the world.

At home, his White House is struggling to deal with scandal and chaos because of accusations that he interfered with the investigation into Russian contacts with his campaign and associates. Mr. Trump left Washington for his nine-day trip on Friday after a barrage of news stories documenting the expanding Russia inquiries, including accusations that he provided classified information to Russian officials in the Oval Office, and reports that he tried to pressure the former F.B.I. director investigating the matter.

Terrorist attacks, natural disasters and other crises often interrupt presidents when they are abroad, throwing their highly choreographed diplomatic schedules into flux and forcing them to deal quickly with rapidly changing events.

In November 2015, while on a trip to Asia, President Barack Obama was repeatedly dragged into the aftermath of the terrorist attacks in Paris, including Republican demands that the government respond by restricting the entry of Syrian refugees.

The following March, Mr. Obama was in Havana when bombs ripped through Brussels Airport and a subway station in the city, shifting attention away from his historic visit to Cuba and toward a renewed discussion about terrorism.

On Tuesday, it was Mr. Trump’ turn to be put on the spot by a grievous event.

In Israel on Tuesday, Mr. Trump began what was supposed to be remarks about his meeting with Mr. Abbas by pledging to support Britain and saying that “his wicked ideology must be obliterated, and I mean completely obliterated.”

His second event of the day — speech at the Israel Museum about the Middle East peace process —lso started with a return to the Manchester bombing and an acknowledgment that the subject of the rest of his trip would be the fight against terror.

“his trip is focused on that goal,”e said. “ringing nations together around that goal. Causing the hateful ideology that drives it so hard and seems to be driving it so fast.”

Mr. Trump began consultations with European leaders even before leaving the Middle East. In a telephone call with Theresa May, the prime minister of Britain, the president said he looked forward to discussing “he ways both countries can work with allies and partners around the world to defeat terrorism,”ccording to a White House summary of the call.

Even though the Manchester attack has the potential to overshadow the rest of Mr. Trump’ trip, it also echoed some of the themes the president had sought to emphasize during the first few days.

While visiting Saudi Arabia over the weekend, Mr. Trump urged the leaders of more than 50 Arab and predominantly Muslim nations to take responsibility for purging their lands of “slamic extremism” and of those who would kill in the name of religion.

“rive them out,”r. Trump said in a speech at a summit meeting in Riyadh. “rive them out of your places of worship. Drive them out of your communities. Drive them out of your holy land. And drive them out of this earth.”

And in Israel, the president had planned to try to kick-start the Israeli-Palestinian peace process in part by arguing that Arab and Muslim nations were united with Israel in fighting against terrorism and containing Iran, a longtime sponsor of terror.

Still, it was clear by the time Mr. Trump wrapped up his discussions in Israel and boarded Air Force One for Rome that the tenor of his trip had changed dramatically.

Mr. Trump, who had largely avoided his provocative Twitter messages since leaving on his foreign trip, posted one that included the flags of the United States and Britain.

“e stand in absolute solidarity with the people of the United Kingdom,”e wrote.

Follow Michael D. Shear on Twitter @shearm.

* Trump Meets With Abbas, but Progress on Peace Remains Elusive

* Trump Comes to Israel Citing a Palestinian Deal as Crucial

* \b ISIS\b0  Claims Responsibility for Manchester Concert Attack; Toll Rises to 22

* The Manchester Concert Bombing in Pictures

President Trump met with Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority, in the West Bank city of Bethlehem on Tuesday. | Stephen Crowley/The New York Times | ISIS has claimed responsibility for the deadly explosion at an arena in Manchester, England, where the American pop singer Ariana Grande had been performing on Monday night. | By ROBIN LINDSAY, MALACHY BROWNE and MARK SCHEFFLER 

Document NYTFEED020170523ed5n002jp
