World
U.S. Hails Reclamation of Mosul; Military commanders, officials warn of tough fights yet ahead in clearing Iraq and Syria of Islamic State

By Gordon Lubold and Felicia Schwartz 
753 words
11 July 2017
03:19
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he return of Mosul to Iraqi control represents a significant symbolic and strategic victory over Islamic State, but the group remains active in parts of Iraq and Syria and is far from defeated, U.S. military commanders and other American officials said as officials in Iraq claimed victory in the battle.

President Donald Trump congratulated Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi and Iraq's security forces, along with Kurdish Peshmerga fighters.

"The victory in Mosul, a city where ISIS once proclaimed its so-called 'caliphate,' signals that its days in Iraq and Syria are numbered," Mr. Trump said in a statement. "We will continue to seek the total destruction of ISIS," he said, using another name for the group.

U.S. officials praised Iraqi forces for

their defeating Islamic State in Mosul, following Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi's declaration Monday in that city that Mosul had been retaken.

"Mosul would have been a challenging fight for any army, and the coalition is proud to stand side by side with our Iraqi partners as they celebrate their hard-fought victory," said Lt. Gen. Steve Townsend, the top U.S. commander in the region, in a statement.

He congratulated Mr. Abadi and noted the victory cost the lives of many Iraqis, soldiers, police and civilians of all ethnicities and sects.

The fight against Islamic State isn't over, Gen. Townsend and other officials stressed. Gen. Townsend noted that while the defeat of Islamic State in Mosul amounts to a "decisive blow," tough fighting remains.

"Now it is time for all Iraqis to unite to ensure ISIS is defeated across the rest of Iraq and that the conditions that led to the rise of ISIS in Iraq are not allowed to return again," he said.

Analysts called it a victory for the U.S.-led coalition, but more so for Iraq and its forces.

"Prime Minister Abadi was seen as a weak leader just one year ago, but not anymore," said Andrew Exum, a former senior Middle East policy official at the Pentagon until January.

He added that the U.S. now faces the task of rebuilding the Iraqi military, "while vying for influence in Baghdad with Iran, with whom the United States shares very few interests now the threat from Daesh has receded," using another name for the extremist group.

Military officials said that hundreds or thousands of Islamic State fighters remain in nearby Tal Afar, al-Qaim and Hawija.

In Syria, where the fight is focused inside the de facto Islamic State capital of Raqqa, the group also is active in Deir Ezzour, Mayadin and al-Bukamal. ISIS is "operating with impunity" in Maydadin and al-Bukamal, a defense official said, while the U.S. has been conducting airstrikes in Deir Ezzour.

The White House on Monday said the liberation of Mosul ends its "longtime nightmare" and congratulated Mr. Abadi, Iraqi security forces and all Iraqis.

"We mourn the thousands of Iraqis brutally killed by ISIS and the millions of Iraqis who suffered at the hands of ISIS," Sarah Huckabee Sanders, a White House spokesperson, said in a statement. "We grieve with the Iraqi people for the loss of heroic soldiers who gave their lives to restore life to their country and we honor their sacrifice.

The current strategy in Iraq and Syria hasn't appreciably changed since Mr. Trump took office. Additional troops have been deployed and given more latitude in how they operate on the ground. At the same time, Defense Secretary Jim Mattis has been given additional authorities to conduct war operations on his own. Under the previous administration, many decisions were made by the White House. But the current strategy, using indigenous forces to conduct the fighting with American military personnel acting as advisers, hasn't changed.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson called the retaking of Mosul "a critical milestone in the global fight against ISIS."

He said the U.S. will work under Iraqi leadership and with the United Nations and coalition officials to help stabilize the area around Mosul and assist those returning home.

"There is still much work to be done to defeat this enemy. The global coalition will continue to stand with our Iraqi partners to ensure that ISIS is defeated wherever it remains in Iraq," he said.

Louise Radnofsky contributed to this article.

Document WSJO000020170711ed7b0008e
