World
 ISIS  Claims Responsibility for Melbourne Attack, but Police Can't Verify Claim; Gunman Yacqub Khayre was killed by police

By David Winning 
821 words
6 June 2017
02:49
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SYDNEY—uthorities said they are a treating a deadly siege in Melbourne as an act of terrorism, though they haven't found direct links between the perpetrator and Islamic State, which claimed responsibility for the attack.

Victoria Police Chief Commissioner Graham Ashton said Yacqub Khayre, a 29-year-old Australian who was on parole after serving seven years in jail for reckless intent to cause harm, appeared to be acting alone when he killed a hotel clerk at a serviced apartment building in the suburb of Brighton and took a woman hostage on Monday. Mr. Khayre was killed by police after firing on officers outside the building.

Mr. Ashton said the investigation will consider whether Mr. Khayre, who came to Australia as a child refugee from Somalia with his family, had planned to lure police into an ambush at the building, among other theories. Mr. Khayre earlier booked a room at the apartment and hired a prostitute, who was taken hostage during the siege but later rescued unharmed.

"Nothing that we have found thus far that suggests that it was planned or done in concert with others," Mr. Ashton said.

Police believe the gunman made a phone call to television broadcaster Channel Seven in which he said the attack was inspired by Islamic State and al Qaeda.

The incident in Melbourne, Australia's second-largest city, is the third deadly attack in Australia by so-called lone wolf assailants with minimal links to organized terror groups. In December 2014, a gunman, later identified as Iranian immigrant Man Haron Monis, took over a central Sydney cafe and held a number of people hostage for 16 hours before police killed him to end the siege. Two hostages, the cafe's manager and a female customer, died.

In October 2015 a 15-year-old boy of Iraqi-Kurdish descent was shot and killed by New South Wales special constables moments after he gunned down a man outside police headquarters in Parramatta, a city more than 22 kilometers from central Sydney.

Australia's five-tier terrorism threat alert system has been set at "probable," the third-highest level, since September 2014.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said the attack raised grave questions about Australia's parole system, given Mr. Khayre's criminal record of violence. Mr. Khayre was acquitted of terrorism charges years ago, but Mr. Turnbull said he was known to have links to terror groups in the past.

Mr. Ashton said police were aware of Islamic State's claim late Monday that Mr. Khayre was one of its "soldiers," in a statement posted to its official Amaq news agency, but hadn't found anything to suggest that he was in contact with overseas terror groups in the run-up to Monday's attack.

Officers have seized computer equipment and electronics from an address in Roxburgh Park, a Melbourne suburb, where Mr. Khayre lived with his mother.

The siege began around 4 p.m. local time on Monday when Mr. Khayre walked into the serviced apartment building and shot and killed the receptionist with a shotgun, who police said was an Australian national born in China. Police said the staff member wasn't known to the gunman. A woman then called the police and said a man had been killed at the building and a hostage situation was under way.

Police evacuated a nearby swimming school and roads were closed while armed officers got in position. Some residents stayed in the apartment block during the siege, which lasted about two hours. Three officers suffered gunshot wounds during the shootout at the end of the siege.

Australia's center-right government, a U.S. ally that has sent warplanes and special forces to help combat Islamic State in Syria and Iraq, has passed a number of antiterrorism laws that increase the powers of intelligence agencies and police to monitor and detain suspected extremists, in addition to prosecuting returning fighters, as worries mount about homegrown militancy.

The government also has introduced tough control orders limiting the movement of suspects as young as 14, while also allowing indefinite detention of jailed militants still who are believed to pose a security risk.

Late last year, Australian authorities said they disrupted a terrorist plot inspired by Islamic State to explode improvised bombs in central Melbourne on or around Christmas Day, with a railway station and a cathedral among the suspected targets.

Victoria State Premier Daniel Andrews said he had spoken with Mr. Turnbull since Monday's attack. "If there are future steps that we need, to take processes that need to begin, then I think all of us will stand ready to do that," Mr. Andrews said.

Write to David Winning at david.winning@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* Lesson of Sydney Siege: More Force, Less Talk

Document WSJO000020170605ed65001up
