Books; Book Review
Paperback Row

By JOUMANA KHATIB 
453 words
20 April 2017
21:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Six new paperbacks to check out this week.

 A RAGE FOR ORDER: THE MIDDLE EAST IN TURMOIL, FROM TAHRIR SQUARE TO \b ISIS\b0  , by Robert F. Worth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $15.) A masterly account of the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings, and the region’ decline into violence and anarchy, by a former New York Times foreign correspondent. Our reviewer, Kenneth M. Pollack, called the book “ marvel of storytelling, with the chapters conjuring a poignancy fitting for the subject.”

THE MIRROR THIEF, by Martin Seay. (Melville House, $17.99.) Linked narratives brimming with delightful, esoteric detail unfold in three Venices: 16th-century Italy; 1950s Venice Beach, Calif.; and the Venetian casino in Las Vegas in 2003. A card counter, the man hired to track him down and an oblique book of poems weave through a series of schemes in this novel, with a structure that recalls David Mitchell’ “loud Atlas.”

 FREE SPEECH: TEN PRINCIPLES FOR A CONNECTED WORLD , by Timothy Garton Ash. (Yale University, $22.) Protected speech is under siege on a wide front and is caught up in a number of modern controversies, from the role of government surveillance to the criminalization of hate speech and the prosecution of whistle-blowers. Garton Ash examines 10 such cases, framed with his call for “ore free speech but also better speech.”

THE NEST, by Cynthia D’prix Sweeney. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $16.99.) A $2 million trust fund is set aside for the Plumb siblings, who are each counting on their share to rescue them from financial straits. But months before they are set to receive the money, Leo, the eldest, squanders a majority of the sum after a car accident; the ensuing family drama of “irst-world problems proves to be an enjoyable comedy of manners as Sweeney artfully skewers family dynamics,”ur reviewer, Patricia Park, wrote.

LAROSE, by Louise Erdrich. (Harper Perennial, $15.99.) While hunting buck, Landreaux does the worst thing imaginable: He accidentally kills his best friend’ child. As penance, he offers his own son, LaRose, to the grieving parents, setting in motion a powerful story of ancestry, justice and forgiveness.

JOE GOULD’ TEETH, by Jill Lepore. (Vintage, $16.) Gould — New York eccentric friendly with many of the early 20th century’ best-known artists —ecided to record everything anyone said to him, aiming to “iden the sphere of history as Walt Whitman did that of poetry.”he project, known as “he Oral History of Our Time,”cquired a near-mythic status —nd then some wondered if it ever existed at all. Lepore, a New Yorker staff writer and Harvard historian, sets out to discover the manuscript’ fate.

Document NYTFEED020170420ed4k0076e
