World News: Egypt's Christians Targeted Again

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
498 words
29 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Islamic State claimed it carried out the attack on a bus full of Coptic Christian pilgrims in central Egypt, which Egyptian officials said killed 29 people.

Islamic State's official news agency Amaq reported Saturday a team of Islamic State gunmen targeted the bus in Minya province on Friday because of its Coptic occupants.

Egyptian President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi responded with airstrikes on what the military said were militant training camps in the eastern Libyan city of Derna. Mr. Sisi said the gunmen had trained and planned the attack in the camps in Libya, which borders Egypt. He provided no evidence to back up the claim, and Islamic State hasn't had a presence in Derna since late 2015.

The rare cross-border strikes by Egypt's military underscored the severity of the crisis Mr. Sisi's government is facing. There has been a rise in Islamic State attacks on Egypt's Christian minority since December.

The airstrikes also raised questions about Egypt's counterterrorism strategy. Islamic State had briefly controlled Derna in 2015 before it was expelled by a rival Islamist coalition with links to al Qaeda later that year. Islamic State then steadily lost most of its territory in Libya, culminating with its defeat in the coastal city of Sirte in December.

Egypt last struck Derna in February 2015 after the militants released a video showing the beheading of a group of Coptic Christian Egyptian laborers on a beach in Libya.

Friday's attack was carried out by gunmen in sport-utility vehicles who ambushed the bus carrying pilgrims to the St. Samuel monastery in Minya, about 190 miles south of Cairo.

It was part of a wave of violence against Egyptian Christians, who make up about 10% of the population. They had mostly supported Mr. Sisi's rise to power as the head of the military, which orchestrated a coup that ousted the country's first freely elected president, Mohammed Morsi, in 2013.

Mr. Sisi has struggled to contain the insurgency by Islamic State's Egyptian affiliate, which had been mostly confined to the remote northern region of the Sinai Peninsula. This has dented his credibility as the self-proclaimed stalwart against terrorism in the Middle East.

Mr. Sisi imposed a three-month national state of emergency in April after Palm Sunday suicide bombings by Islamic State's Egypt affiliate, Sinai Province, which killed at least 45 worshipers at churches in Alexandria and Tanta.

In December, an ISIS bombing at Cairo's Coptic cathedral killed 25 people, the largest attack on a Christian house of worship in Egypt since 2011.

Mokhtar Awad, an analyst at the Program on Extremism at George Washington University, said that with travel to Syria and Iraq becoming increasingly difficult, local militants have adopted the brutal tactics of Islamic State in those countries -- particularly the targeting of religious and ethnic minorities.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170528ed5t0000o
