Briefing
Syria, London, United Airlines: Your Tuesday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,108 words
11 April 2017
11:32
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•yrian leadership is nearing its end, Tillerson says.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson said today that President Bashar al-Assad’ government is “oming to an end.” Before traveling to Moscow, Mr. Tillerson also said Russia risked becoming irrelevant in the Middle East by continuing to support Mr. Assad.

Russia has denounced the U.S. missile strikes on a Syrian air base last week, a feud that frees Washington and Moscow from the constraints of having to act like friends.

In the days since the attack, the Trump administration has spoken with multiple voices to explain its evolving policy. One voice has not been heard: that of President Trump himself.

•udge rejects Texas voter ID law.

A federal judge ruled on Monday that the state’ voter identification measure, one of the nation’ toughest, discriminates against black and Hispanic voters.

The ruling raises the possibility that election procedures in Texas could be put back under federal oversight.

•labama’ governor resigns over sex scandal.

Facing impeachment hearings, Gov. Robert Bentley stepped down and pleaded guilty to two misdemeanor charges.

He had previously acknowledged making sexually charged remarks to a top aide.

•ttacks reveal a new strategy for ISIS.

Suicide bombings at two churches on Sunday suggest that Islamic State militants have found a new target in their sectarian war: the Christian communities of Egypt.

•hree dead in California school shooting.

Two adults and one student were killed, apparently in a murder-suicide, in an elementary school classroom in San Bernardino, Calif.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

Today’ show examines how a mild-mannered ophthalmologist became the ruler of Syria.

Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.

Business

•Wells Fargo plans to claw back an additional $75 million in compensation from the two executives on whom it pinned most of the blame for a scandal over fraudulent accounts.

• United Airlines passenger, screaming and bloodied, was dragged off an overbooked flight in Chicago after he refused to leave the plane. Outrage ensued.

•n a sign of how the auto industry’ future is being reimagined, the electric-car maker Tesla passed General Motors as America’ most valuable automaker.

•.S. stocks were up on Monday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets.

Smarter Living

•f a glass of milk is part of your morning routine, take note: Nut milks pale in comparison with cow’ milk when it comes to nutrients.

•riting a kiss-off letter to your boss may do wonders for you. But remember to press delete, not send.

•hopped parsley and mint lift this recipe for seared pork cutlets with green-garlic salsa verde.

Noteworthy

•leaning up the Chesapeake Bay.

In today’ 360 video, learn how proposed budget cuts to the cleanup effort could affect a larger ecosystem.

•ondon, an international capital in limbo.

Our reporter visited the city she called home for 15 years and found that, after the “rexit”eferendum, the British capital’ future is far from certain.

•New York Times wins three Pulitzers.

The Times collected journalism’ highest honor for breaking news photography, feature writing and international reporting. Here are the winning pieces.

The New York Daily News and ProPublica shared the prize for public service.

•artisan writing you shouldn’ miss.

Why it’ O.K. that President Trump has no “octrine,”nd the case for liberals to defend the Second Amendment. We scoured the internet for political writing from the right and the left that you might not have seen.

•an this man revive the Yankees?

Brian Cashman has led the team to four World Series titles as its general manager, but it has appeared in only one playoff game in the past four seasons. (Promisingly, the Yankeeswon Monday’ home opener.)

•est of late-night TV.

On Monday’ “Jimmy Kimmel Live,” John Stamos and Bob Saget, the former stars of “ull House,”emembered Don Rickles, the famed insult comedian who died last week.

We also look at how Stephen Colberthas made the “he Late Show”reat again.

Back Story

“ouston, we’e had a problem.”

The crew of Apollo 13, launched from Kennedy Space Center in Florida on this day in 1970, was 200,000 miles above Earth when one of the craft’ oxygen tanks exploded.

The blast either ruptured a line or caused a valve on the other tank to leak. Then the warning lights for the fuel cells began flashing, indicating that the electricity supply was in jeopardy.

The mission was supposed to be NASA’ third crewed moon landing. The “roblem”ame two days in, crippling the command module’ supply of electricity, light and water.

The three-person crew was able to make a series of decisions and improvise repairs to the carbon dioxide removal system that enabled them to use the lunar module as a “lifeboat”o safely return to Earth on April 17.

Although the mission was aborted and the crew never landed on the moon, their heroics —nd their rescue —esulted in the mission being classified as a “successful failure.”

The flight remains the record for the farthest humans have ever traveled from Earth, and the response to the near disaster was deemed “NASA’ finest hour.”

Inyoung Kang contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com  .

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

A reflection of visitors on the highest viewing platform at the top of the Shard tower, overlooking London. The British capital’ future as an international hub is thrown into doubt by “rexit.” Sergey Ponomarev for The New York Times | “ have decided it is time for me to step down as Alabama’ governor,”obert Bentley announced in Montgomery on Monday. | Marvin Gentry/Reuters | A prayer service in San Bernardino, Calif., after a gunman walked into an elementary school on Monday and opened fire. | Jae C. Hong/Associated Press | Photos from a video taken by a United Airlines passenger showing another passenger being dragged off a flight. | Audra D. Bridges, via Associated Press | The Apollo 13 crew on a short parade in Manhattan, on June 3, 1970. | William E. Sauro/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170411ed4b002ut
