U.S.
Jared Kushner Visits Iraq on Invitation From Joint Chiefs Chairman

By MAGGIE HABERMAN 
400 words
3 April 2017
04:34
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Jared Kushner, President Trump’ son-in-law, landed in Iraq on Monday, military officials said, visiting the country as the American military is aiding Iraqi forces in their brutal fight to retake Mosul from the Islamic State.

It was unclear what Mr. Kushner, who has been expanding his reach in his father-in-law’ administration, planned to gain from the trip. Mr. Kushner, 36, who serves as a senior adviser to Mr. Trump, was invited by Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Navy Capt. Greg Hicks, a spokesman for the chairman, said early Monday that the general had arrived in Iraq for meetings, including with coalition officials, accompanied by Mr. Kushner and Thomas P. Bossert, the president’ homeland security adviser.

The general invited Mr. Kushner and Mr. Bossert to accompany him “o receive an update on the status of the counter-ISIS campaign in Iraq and Syria,”aptain Hicks said.

Mr. Kushner is “raveling on behalf of the president to express the president’ support and commitment to the government of Iraq and U.S. personnel currently engaged in the campaign”gainst the Islamic State, Captain Hicks added.

Mr. Trump has repeatedly turned to Mr. Kushner as an envoy to foreign leaders, at times creating a parallel structure to the one led by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson. Mr. Kushner has had a role in discussions with Mexico, whose government officials have expressed concern over Mr. Trump’ incendiary remarks on trade policy and his vow to build a wall at the border.

The president has also charged Mr. Kushner, who has no previous government or diplomatic experience, with a vague edict to establish peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Mr. Kushner is also taking the lead in preparing the West Wing for Mr. Trump’ meeting this week with the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, at Mar-a-Lago, the president’ club in Palm Beach, Fla.

In addition, Mr. Kushner has created an Office of American Innovation, which is intended to use ideas from the business world to improve the government.

Jared Kushner, President Trump’ son-in-law, in February at the White House. Mr. Trump has repeatedly turned to Mr. Kushner as an envoy to foreign leaders. | Doug Mills/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170403ed4300105
