World News -- Middle East Crossroads: After Mosul, Faraway  ISIS  'Provinces' Fight On

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
661 words
21 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A9
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

DUBAI -- In the three years since it proclaimed a world-wide caliphate, Islamic State has become a global franchise -- which means the loss of its core in Syria and Iraq won't pacify the far-flung conflict zones where the group's affiliates operate.

Regional "provinces" of Islamic State have sprung up from West Africa to the Philippines after the group's self-appointed "caliph," Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, seized the Iraqi city of Mosul in 2014 and demanded allegiance from Muslims world-wide.

Most of these "provinces" grew out of existing insurgent organizations, such as Nigeria's Boko Haram or Ansar Beit al-Maqdis in Egypt's Sinai Peninsula. These groups simply reflagged with Islamic State's new brand -- then seen as uniquely appealing to recruits and donors because of Islamic State's seeming invincibility.

Other "provinces" were breakaways from relatively more-moderate groups, such as Islamic State Khorasan, which absorbed the most violent elements of the Taliban in Afghanistan and Pakistan. Some groups, like Boko Haram, controlled huge territory. Other Islamic State "provinces," such as the one in Russia's North Caucasus, consisted of scattered militants.

In any case, the conflicts in which these "provinces" thrived preceded Islamic State's 2014 proclamation. And even after the recent liberation of Mosul and the impending collapse of Islamic State's second-largest stronghold of Raqqa, Syria, these distant conflicts will persist.

"Operationally, the fall of Mosul changes nothing because every one of these groups is autonomous from Islamic State central," said Mathieu Guidere, a terrorism expert at the University of Toulouse. "The only impact is psychological -- these groups will fear that something like what happened to Mosul will happen to them, and will draw their lessons."

In fact, just as Iraqi troops were mopping up the last pockets of resistance in Mosul, Islamic State's Asian affiliate halfway around the world attempted a dramatic takeover of Marawi, one of the largest Muslim cities on the southern Philippines island of Mindanao.

"Islamic State is a very resilient organization, it's not one single group but a movement now," said Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and Terrorism Research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore. "And because the world has no real strategy to contain, isolate and eliminate Islamic State beyond Iraq and Syria, we will see a significant global expansion of this group."

Asia, home to many more Muslims than the Middle East, is a particular concern. "We should prepare for a Daesh pivot to Asia," said Richard Javad Heydarian, a security analyst in the Philippines, using an Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

While Islamic State -- routed from much of its territory in Syria and Iraq -- no longer has the winning momentum that once made it so attractive to potential jihadists, the organization has left a permanent mark on the motley assortment of militant groups that joined its caliphate project.

One consequence of Islamic State's losses in the Middle East may be a rekindled debate within the organization's affiliates about just how indiscriminately brutal they should be.

That issue has already split Boko Haram, with one faction treating anyone not actively aiding the group as apostates deserving death and another preaching more-targeted violence.

In trying to assess Islamic State's future after Mosul, terrorism experts and counterterrorism officials look for clues in what happened to al Qaeda after the loss of its Afghan base in 2001 and the killing of Osama bin Laden10 years later. While these events weakened al Qaeda's core and reduced its ability to target the West, regional affiliates have flourished.

Niger parliament member Lamido Moumouni Harouna represents a region frequently attacked by Boko Haram. "The conflict here is a local conflict," he said. "And the way it will develop will depend on how the local environment develops."

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170721ed7l0001m
