World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,055 words
7 September 2017
12:56
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Double-Crossing the Aisle

President Trump stunned Republicans on Wednesday when he sided with Democrats on a proposal to attach aid for Hurricane Harvey victims to measures to keep the government funded and its borrowing limit suspended until mid-December. Mr. Trump's decision to ignore pleas from GOP congressional leaders upended the partisan alliances that have long set the boundaries of congressional policy-making—nd is likely to inflame tensions with his fellow Republicans. It also raises the question of whether he will now turn to Democrats to reach deals on tax reform and immigration. If approved by Congress, Wednesday's agreement would defer the threat of a partial government shutdown and a default on the country's debt until Dec. 15 and dispatch the first $7.85 billion installment of Harvey relief.

No-Go Cohn

After months of dangling the possibility that he would make him Federal Reserve chairman, President Trump is now unlikely to nominate Gary Cohn, his top economic adviser, to succeed Janet Yellen as Fed chief when her term expires in early February—dding to the uncertainty over central-bank leadership and policies. Mr. Trump had said in July that he was considering Mr. Cohn, and his change in thinking potentially bolsters the odds of his nominating Ms. Yellen for a second term. On Wednesday Fed Vice Chairman Stanley Fischer said he will resign next month for personal reasons, creating a fourth vacancy on the powerful seven-member Fed board of governors. His departure accelerates Mr. Trump's opportunity to put his stamp on the central bank.

Chinese Studies

How have North Korea's nuclear and missile programs advanced so rapidly despite international efforts to keep the technology out of its hands? Our deep dive suggests the answer may lie in expertise brought home by North Korean scientists who studied abroad, from China to India to Italy. We also report that a U.S. proposal for new United Nations sanctions against North Korea would clamp an embargo on its oil and textile trade and slap a full asset freeze and world-wide travel ban on leader Kim Jong Un and key regime members and institutions—ignificantly escalating pressure on Pyongyang. Diplomats said they expect a vote on Sept. 11; veto-holding China and Russia are the highest hurdles to passage. A new U.N. report alleges that member nations are helping North Korea evade the current sanctions. The Trump administration also told top lawmakers that terminating a free-trade agreement with South Korea, much maligned by the president, is no longer an immediate priority.

Narrow Appeal

Four years ago Bombardier rolled out a passenger jet with wide seats, ample overhead bins and an extra-quiet engine. It isn't selling well. While there are many reasons for that, the lack of interest highlights the low priority that airlines believe passengers place on comfort. "Passengers get into anything that flies if the ticket is cheap," says the chief executive of Air Baltic, one of two small European airlines flying the C Series planes. New fuel-efficient engines and lighter airframe materials allowed Bombardier to keep operating costs low and still offer a wide cabin. The question is whether airlines care enough to buy.

Today's Video

Fire and Fury

As tensions rise around the Korean Peninsula, American leaders have been openly discussing what was once unthinkable: A military intervention in North Korea. If this were to happen, here's how specialists on North Korean security see things playing out.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Teacher Shortage Prompts Some States to Lower the Bar

Senators Discuss Bipartisan Approach to Repair Obamacare

WORLD

Court Rules Hungary Must Take Migrants, Deepening Tensions in EU

In Syria, New Conflict Looms as \b ISIS\b0  Loses Ground

BUSINESS

After Revamp at Hewlett-Packard, What Is Next for Meg Whitman?

Sanofi Stops Work on Two Zika Vaccines

MARKETS

'Hurricane Deductibles' Shift Home-Repair Costs to Consumers

Yuan's Sharp Rise Muddles China's Growth Picture

Number of the Day

$100,000

The advertising spending Facebook said it has identified by about 500 "inauthentic" accounts it believes have ties to Russia, following a review in response to intelligence-community concerns about Russian activity during the 2016 election. It is Facebook's first acknowledgment that Russian actors may have used its platform during the presidential campaign.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on President Trump's debt-ceiling deal with Democrats? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on the latest WSJ/NBC News survey, Mike Furlong of Alabama said: "The survey is just the latest example of polarization in our society. We increasingly listen only to those people who agree with us and ignore those who don't. In the interest of keeping their jobs rather than doing their jobs, officeholders feed and exacerbate this separation. This will change only with courageous leadership, and frankly and fearfully, I see no signs of it." Steve Shannon of New Jersey shared: "It would behoove our nation if more Democrats attended religious services and more Republicans gave science similar due. Leaders of both parties should take heed rather than dig in on their heels." And Kevin Freiert of Connecticut wrote: "I think America is ready for new political parties so that people can choose the candidate that reflects their positions on a wide range of issues instead of settling for the best of the bad options."

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170907ed97001rx
