World
U.S. Coalition Acknowledges It Carried Out Airstrike in Area of Civilian Deaths; Death toll may reach up to 200 people, according to local officials and residents

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
884 words
25 March 2017
22:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

MOSUL, Iraq—he U.S.-led coalition in Iraq said Saturday it carried out airstrikes against Islamic State positions in western Mosul, where scores of civilians were allegedly killed, as it assists Iraqi troops engaged in fierce fighting to retake the entire city from the extremist group.

An initial review of airstrikes over the past few days indicates that, at the request of the Iraqi Security Forces, the coalition struck Islamic State fighters and equipment on March 17 in West Mosul at the location corresponding to allegations of civilian casualties, the U.S.-led coalition said in a statement. It didn't provide further details but said it would continue to assess the allegations.

Local Iraqi officials and residents said the death toll may reach up to 200 people, centering around the Mosul al-Jadeeda district, where residents and rescue workers were still recovering bodies buried under mounds of concrete. It wasn't possible to independently verify this number.

A member of Mosul's local council said most of the victims were women, children and the elderly, some of whom were forced into a cluster of homes that Islamic State fighters were using as sniper positions against advancing Iraqi troops.

Late on Saturday, Iraq's minister of defense, Erfan al-Hayali, said he had also launched an inquiry into the allegations of mass civilian casualties in Mosul al-Jadeeda, following mounting pressure from mostly-Sunni politicians who voiced outrage over the incident.

If confirmed that the strike killed the civilians, it could represent the largest death toll by a U.S.-led coalition airstrike since its air campaign against Islamic State began in August 2014. The allegations come just days after the U.S. said it was also investigating two recent reports of mass civilian casualties caused by U.S.-led coalition airstrikes in Syria targeting Islamic State and al Qaeda.

The U.S. military's pace of operations has increased considerably in both countries, raising questions about effects of a higher tempo of operations.

Military officials have said there has been no change in the rules of engagement governing military strikes. At the same time, U.S. military commanders have been operating under new authorities shifting more authority for "battlefield decisions" to ground commanders. Some of the changes began last year under the Obama administration.

A U.S. military official said Friday that it was far from clear if the incidents in Iraq and Syria were related. "Of course we are looking into it but so far we think these are coincidental," the official said.

Airwars, an independent organization that monitors reports of civilian casualties in Iraq and Syria, has reported allegations that more than 1,000 people have died in both countries this month, with the largest spike coming from airstrikes in western Mosul.

Iraqi troops, assisted by coalition airstrikes and U.S. military advisers on the ground, have been engaged in fierce fighting in western Mosul since Feb. 19. In late January, the forces wrested back eastern Mosul from Islamic State after a battle that began in mid-October.

While eastern Mosul's infrastructure and civilians survived with relatively little damage, the fight for western Mosul has been marked by higher levels of destruction, and residents have steadily fled the city by the tens of thousands under increasingly desperate conditions.

Senior Iraqi military officers said part of the destruction in Mosul al-Jadeeda was caused when a missile hit a truck rigged by Islamic State with explosives, triggering a massive blast that destroyed four homes and burying dozens of people sheltering inside the basements.

"We are stunned by this terrible loss of life," Lise Grande, the United Nations' humanitarian coordinator for Iraq, said in a statement.

Ghazwan Ahmed, a member of the provincial council for Mosul, said Islamic State has been using residents as human shields as a strategy to slow down advancing Iraqi forces and a propaganda tool to claim that "security forces are deliberately targeting civilians."

He said militants had herded residents of Mosul al-Jadeeda into homes that were hit and began using the rooftops as sniper positions and to fire mortars.

Mr. Ahmed said it wasn't clear if the airstrike originated from Iraqi or coalition aircraft, but that the incident in Mosul al-Jadeeda was a stark example of why western Mosul's older infrastructure and densely populated neighborhoods required a rethinking of the military strategy to evict Islamic State.

"Such incidents are very worrying for us," he said. "We need a change in the plans there and we need accurate and clean targeting of terrorists in order to prevent civilians from dying in such big numbers."

The U.S.-led coalition and the Iraqi air force both conduct airstrikes in Mosul but Iraqi ground forces in Mosul al-Jadeeda almost exclusively coordinate strikes with the coalition.

Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad contributed to this article.

Write to Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com

Related

* Islamic State Drones Terrorize Iraqi Forces as Mosul Battle Rages

* Foreign \b ISIS\b0  Fighters Increasingly Isolated in Mosul Battle

* Iraqis Tell of Islamic State Brutality in Mosul

Document WSJO000020170325ed3p0012x
