 ISIS  and the Destruction Of Middle Eastern Relics

By Thomas Campbell 
830 words
26 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

If you've ever been to the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York, chances are that you visited the glass pavilion containing the Temple of Dendur. One of only three such temples outside Egypt, it was built by the Roman emperor Augustus around 10 B.C. as part of an effort to cultivate the local Nubian population. This month marks its 50th anniversary overlooking Central Park, where it provides an unforgettable glimpse of Egypt's ancient culture for millions of tourists who will never travel to the Middle East.

At a time when the U.S. is questioning the nature of its longstanding relationships with countries across the world, the temple is a symbol of international cooperation. In the 1960s, 50 nations united to save 22 irreplaceable monuments -- including the Temple of Dendur -- set to be submerged during the construction of Lake Nasser. These countries were motivated not by their own national interests but by an understanding that mankind has a common interest in protecting historic monuments.

With a final investment of $16 million, the U.S. became the largest contributor to the $100 million preservation project. As a demonstration of gratitude, Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser gave the Temple of Dendur to the U.S. in 1965. After a competition led by the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities, President Lyndon Johnson decided that the 2,000-year-old temple should go to the Met.

The Middle East's fragile cultural heritage was in the news again last week. On Wednesday Islamic State blew up the historic Grand al-Nuri Mosque in Mosul, obliterating a cultural and religious site that had stood since 1173. Religious fundamentalism, illicit excavation, black-market trade and simple neglect have destroyed historic sites in the Middle East at an alarming rate. Wednesday's bombing underscores the most urgent problem: Islamic State and its affiliates have turned cultural destruction in Iraq and Syria into propaganda, even as they sell looted works of art on the black market to raise money for arms.

Why should we worry about a bunch of old monuments when the human cost of the unrest is so high? There are two reasons. First, the Middle East is the cradle of civilization. These monuments are integral to our collective human story. Architectural monuments illuminate the complexity of our common past. So much has already been lost. We have a moral obligation to save what remains.

A focus on history and heritage will also be key to the eventual recovery of the Middle East. Cultural sites provide citizens with a sense of their value and self-identity beyond religious dogma. They also provide jobs, income and stability by attracting tourists. Iraq and Syria are home to some of the most significant sites in the history of civilization. It may be hard to conceive of a vacation in Damascus or Baghdad today, but travel to Vietnam would have been equally inconceivable 40 years ago. In 2017, Vietnam projects tourist revenue of $20 billion.

Countries with economies tied to tourism are motivated to maintain peace and internal safety. Thus it is in the U.S. national interest to protect Middle Eastern heritage sites.

Conflicts across the region make modern preservation efforts more complicated than the drive to save the monuments threatened by Lake Nasser. Over the past year, Britain and France created funds to help protect and restore monuments in Middle Eastern conflict zones. Earlier this spring, the United Nations passed a resolution defining the destruction of historic monuments as a war crime, creating the basis for future intervention and criminal prosecution.

This is all laudable and necessary preparation for a time when the region stabilizes. In the short term, local scholars and archaeologists, who often work in grave danger, may be the most effective avenue for aid. In late 2015, staff from the Met convened a conference in Istanbul for colleagues from museums in Iraq and Syria. They told us of their urgent need for basic photography and computer equipment to document collections that are at risk. In response, the Met developed portable documentation kits and sent them to these colleagues via Jordan. While this may sound like a drop in the bucket, it met an urgent need.

This process of listening and responding to on-the-ground experts is both scalable and replicable. Governments and foundations should promote -- and fund -- similar collaborations. The U.S. government could certainly play a more active role than it has so far.

As we reflect on the effort that saved the Temple of Dendur, let's not be deterred by the sheer complexity of present-day challenges. Iraq and Syria will have peace once again. For the sake of future generations, let's play our part in safeguarding the cultural heritage of the Middle East.

---

Mr. Campbell is director of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170626ed6q00009
