U.S.; Politics
Why Republicans Want to End the Periodic Review Board for Guantáamo Detainees

By CHARLIE SAVAGE 
1,006 words
18 February 2017
01:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON —n a letter to President Trump made public this week, 11 Republican senators said that a parole-like board that decides whether to recommend transferring Guantáamo Bay detainees “hould be suspended immediately.”

The next hearing of the Periodic Review Board is scheduled for Feb. 28; the Pentagon this week invited reporters to attend it. If the hearing goes forward as planned, it would be the second of the Trump era. The first was on Feb. 9, the same day that the senators wrote their letter.

The tension over the panel is elevating attention to it and its potential fate under Mr. Trump.

What is the Periodic Review Board?

Established by President Barack Obama in a 2011 executive order, the board looks at Guantáamo detainees who have been deemed untriable but too dangerous to release. The board’ job is to determine whether each such prisoner should be held in open-ended detention or moved to a list of those recommended for transfer to stable countries.

The board is made up of senior Civil Service officials from six agencies: the Departments of Defense, Homeland Security, Justice and State, and the offices of the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the director of national intelligence. It operates by consensus, so each department or agency essentially has a veto, and the heads of each agency can overrule a recommendation.

A decision by the board to put a detainee on the transfer list does not necessarily mean he will be released: The government considers eligibility for transfer a policy recommendation, not a legal right. In the Obama era, dozens of men —ostly lower-level detainees from Yemen —tayed locked up for years after being put on the list because there was no good place to send them.

The Obama administration ultimately reduced the list to five, but the Trump administration has given no indication that it will try to repatriate or resettle the men.

Where did the board come from?

The law of war permits the detention without trial of captured enemies until hostilities end. But that rule was designed for traditional wars that last only a few years. Because the war against Al Qaeda and its progeny may last a lifetime, the government decided it needed a process to decide whether it still made sense to keep holding a particular prisoner as the years passed.

In its second term, George W. Bush’ administration set up a predecessor panel called the Administrative Review Board. Unlike the Periodic Review Board, the panel was made up of military officers only, and detainees had no right to legal representation during their hearings. In 2009, Mr. Obama shut down the Bush-era board and appointed a six-agency task force to review the remaining detainees. It recommended transferring 156, continuing to hold 48 without trial, and prosecuting 36, though not all of those ended up being charged. Mr. Obama later created the boards to periodically re-evaluate those who were neither charged nor already on the transfer list.

What is its record?

Since the Periodic Review Board began operating in late 2013, it has re-examined 63 detainees being held in open-ended detention. To date, the board has designated 37 for transfer —ost of whom are now gone —hile reaffirming the continued detention of 26.

Why is it controversial?

Republicans criticized Mr. Obama’ efforts to whittle down the number of men being held at Guantáamo, warning about the risk of recidivism. According to the office of the director of national intelligence, of 693 former detainees transferred through July 2016, 17.6 percent are “onfirmed”o have re-engaged in militant activity, and another 12.4 percent are “uspected”f having done so.

“here should be no further releases from Gitmo,”r. Trump wrote on Twitter early last month, amid the final transfers of the Obama era. “hese are extremely dangerous people and should not be allowed back onto the battlefield.”

Still, most recidivist former detainees left during the Bush administration, which carried out bulk repatriations to countries like Afghanistan and Saudi Arabia. Among those who left since 2009, 5.6 percent are deemed “onfirmed”nd 6.8 percent are “uspected.”

Is Trump legally required to keep the board?

No statute requires the boards to operate. The Geneva Conventions require an initial status hearing for captured enemy fighters but not periodic reviews thereafter. But some legal scholars argue that because this war is open-ended, there may be an implied or customary legal requirement for a parole-like process. If Mr. Trump shuts down the boards, lawyers for detainees would probably use that absence of any process to bring new habeas corpus challenges.

The Trump administration has been circulating various drafts of an executive order on detainee policy, some of which call for Defense Secretary Jim Mattis to lead a 120-day review of whether to carry out any more transfers. But Charles Stimson, a scholar at the conservative Heritage Foundation who was the top Pentagon detainee policy official in the Bush administration’ second term and who helped develop the predecessor Administrative Review Board, argued that the Periodic Review Board served a “aluable function.”

“eeping those boards going is a separate and distinct issue from what criteria they should use and whether or not the secretaries are ultimately going to agree with any recommendation they make,”r. Stimson said. “ would caution the administration against scrapping them unless and until they study the issue more closely.”

Follow Charlie Savage on Twitter@charlie_savage.

* \b ISIS\b0  Detainees May Be Held at Guantáamo, Document Shows

* Obama Transfers 4 From Guantáamo, Leaving 41 There as Term Ends

* Donald Trump ‘ine’ith Prosecuting U.S. Citizens at Guantáamo

* After Yemeni’ 13 Years in Guantáamo, Freedom for the Soul Takes Longer

Republican senators have called for the suspension of a board that weighs detainee transfers from Guantáamo Bay. | Damon Winter/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170218ed2i0008d
