World; Europe
Allies Fear Trump Is Eroding America’ Moral Authority

By ALISSA J. RUBIN 
1,851 words
10 March 2017
17:37
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections Appended

PARIS —hen the State Department released its annual human rights report last week, it contained many of the usual tough American judgments of other countries. Iran was criticized for restricting freedom of religion and the media; Russia for discriminating against minorities; Eritrea for using torture; Bulgaria for violence against migrants and asylum seekers. The list went on.

What was notably missing this year, however, was the usual fanfare around the report and a news conference promoting it by the new secretary of state, Rex W. Tillerson, as Democratic and Republican administrations have almost always done.

The State Department dismissed criticism of Mr. Tillerson’ absence, which came even from some Republicans. But for observers of American foreign policy, it was hard not to interpret the low-key rollout as another step by the Trump administration away from America’ traditional role as a moral authority on the world stage that tries to shape and promote democratic norms, both for their intrinsic value and to create a more secure world.

Interviews with more than a dozen former diplomats, professors, human rights advocates and international politicians, both abroad and in the United States, suggested that the United States under President Trump was poised to cede not only this global role, but also its ability to lead by example.

Many pointed out that America’ own actions over the years have already eroded its moral standing —uantáamo Bay, the use of torture on suspected terrorists and the civilian casualties in Iraq and Afghanistan, to name a few.

But Mr. Trump’ administration stands alone, many experts said, for the divisiveness of its tone toward minorities and the media at home and toward Muslims and migrants abroad, its disparagement of NATO and the European Union and its praise of President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, which have blurred distinctions between allies and enemies.

Mr. Trump himself recently put the United States on the same moral plane as Russia, when the Fox News talk show host Bill O’eilly protested during an interview that Mr. Putin was a killer.

“here are a lot of killers,”r. Trump quickly responded. “e’e got a lot of killers. What, do you think our country’ so innocent?”

The comment alarmed many because it underscored an approach by Mr. Trump, like the rejection of migrants from certain predominantly Muslim countries, that has stripped much of the moral component from American foreign relations and left him being lectured by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and others about his duties under international law.

Her foreign minister, Sigmar Gabriel, has gone one step further, reminding America of its moral duty as the most powerful Western country and one founded by Christian refugees.

“he United States is a country where Christian traditions have an important meaning. Loving your neighbor is a major Christian value, and that includes helping people,”e said recently. “his is what unites us in the West and this is what we want to make clear to the Americans.”

Behind the rhetoric is the idea that moral authority —s amorphous and idealistic as that can sound —as imbued America with a special kind of clout in the world, with a power that is different from that wielded by autocrats and dictators or by big countries like Russia and China.

While the Soviet-era dominance across Eastern Europe undoubtedly was undermined by an expensive Cold War arms race with the United States, it was the Western Democratic system and America that many people looked to emulate, former diplomats said.

“he Berlin Wall didn’ come down because people were responding to American howitzers,”aid Joseph Nye, a former senior State Department official and now a professor at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. “t came down under hammers and bulldozers wielded by people whose minds had been affected by the ideas of the West.”

The acting State Department spokesman, Mark C. Toner, rejected any suggestion that the United States was walking away from its international obligations or that the administration’ statements and policies to date had diminished America’ standing.

“e’e signaled at every level our continued commitment to NATO,”e said. “n Russia, Secretary of State Tillerson has been clear that we would cooperate with Russia wherever possible, but not at the expense of Ukraine or Syria.”

“s for the new executive order,”e added, “his administration isn’ ignoring the plight of refugees or discouraging people from visiting the U.S. It is simply making the security of the American people its No. 1 priority and instituting a temporary pause so that we can evaluate and ensure our vetting processes are as strong as they can possibly be. In short, American diplomacy plays an important role in American security, a security which promotes our prosperity.”

Not all are so convinced. Though in its early stages, Mr. Trump’ presidency has for many called into question what kind of role America aims to play in the world, and even whether it wants to remain an example for other countries. Abandoning that role will have consequences, some are warning.

If America no longer presents an image of religious tolerance — core component of its moral standing —t undermines its ability to make needed alliances, several diplomats said.

“ven in the days of George W. Bush, there was no feeling that Bush was against Muslims,”aid Marwan Muasher, a former foreign minister of Jordan and now at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, where he is vice president for studies and oversees research on the Middle East.

“y contrast,”e said, “r. Trump’ administration has seemed almost to revel in its anti-Islamic sentiments. There is no effort on the administration’ side to reverse that image. There’ no empathy toward the region in any way.”

For Hoshyar Zebari, a former foreign minister of Iraq, the initial decision to issue the migrant ban and include Iraq was utterly puzzling as well as deeply unfair, given how many Iraqis had fought on the same side as the Americans against the Islamic State and its precursors in Iraq.

Mr. Trump does seem to have been convinced of the importance of Iraq’ role in the fight against Islamic extremism, and the latest version of his immigration ban includes six predominantly Muslim countries, leaving Iraq off the list. Still, the anti-Muslim rhetoric “as emboldened extremists that this is the true face of America,”r. Zebari said.

Some of the policies Mr. Trump seems eager to pursue may also compromise America’ ability to lecture China about more tolerance toward Tibetan Buddhists or Uighurs, and Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey about a free news media or tolerance of the Kurds, they noted.

Not everyone agrees that Mr. Trump’ approach is a startling departure from America’ values, however.

Hubert Vérine, a former French foreign minister, noted that while Barack Obama may have been “ore elegant”nd “efined”n his words, he pursued many policies similar to Mr. Trump’, like urging NATO members to do more.

“ne cannot describe the international system before Trump as working very well,”r. Vérine said. “t’ not as though it was a paradisiacal, idyllic world, and abruptly Trump appeared like some kind of Attila.”

Yet the idea of a moral component in American identity dates back to the pilgrims. The notion became a particularly strong principle in foreign policy after World War I, with the United States playing a leading role in the creation of global organizations.

That moral strand was strengthened by World War II, not only because of America’ part in helping to vanquish the Nazis, but also its postwar efforts to help rebuild Europe and form the United Nations.

Now, as America looks at minimizing its commitments to NATO and the European Union, there is the sense that it can no longer be counted on as a reliable partner.

“he most burning question overseas is, ‘an we rely on the United States to keep its commitments, can we rely on you to lead in the way we expect, are you going to consider the interests of your allies when new deals are made?’”aid Michèe Flournoy, the former under secretary of defense for policy in the Obama administration.

Instead, Mr. Trump seems intent to pursue a “hat’ in it for us?”pproach to foreign policy much closer to that of Russia, where threats and lethal power are its chief points of leverage and where international relations are often viewed as a zero-sum game. Where that leads is anyone’ guess.

“hat is very different is that the Trump administration says very bluntly that ‘merica has no responsibility in the world and it will pull back,’”aid Laurence Nardon, who runs the North America program at the French Institute for International Relations in Paris, a prominent think tank.

“rump will still do things, but in a transactional way,”he added. “e will fight ISIS because it’ perceived as a true and real danger to the United States, and he’l do deals that benefit the country, but not out of any sense of moral responsibility to help the rest of the world.”

Correction: March 10, 2017, Friday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article misstated Vladimir Putin’ middle initial. It is V., not I.

Correction: March 15, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of the above correction omitted the source of the error. It was made during the editing process, not by the reporter.

* Trump’ New Travel Ban Blocks Migrants From Six Nations, Sparing Iraq

* European Leaders Reject Trump’ Refugee Ban as Violating Principles

* For Europe, There’ a New Threat in Town: The U.S.

* Trump Threatens Europe’ Stability, a Top Leader Warns

* Trump Criticizes NATO and Hopes for ‘ood Deals’ith Russia

United States soldiers in Al Nasr Wal Salam, Iraq, in 2008. Critics say that civilian casualties in Iraq and other countries have tarnished the moral standing of the United States. | Ashley Gilbertson for The New York Times | Ethnic Yemenis and supporters in Brooklyn protesting President Trump’ executive order temporarily barring immigrants and refugees from Muslim-majority countries. | Spencer Platt/Getty Images | Former President George W. Bush with former President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan in Kabul in 2008. “ven in the days of George W. Bush, there was no feeling that Bush was against Muslims,”aid Marwan Muasher, a former foreign minister of Jordan and now a fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. | Lynsey Addario for The New York Times | The wall on the beach at Playa Tijuana, Mexico. The Muslim diplomats say they are little comforted that President Trump seems equally unsympathetic to Catholic and other Christian immigrants, evident in his wanting to build a wall with Mexico. | Bryan Denton for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170310ed3a005sd
