opinion
When Terrorists Target Children; Editorial

By THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
689 words
23 May 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Every victim of terrorism is innocent, and every one is to be mourned. But the bombing in Manchester, England, on Monday night that killed teenage or even younger fans of the pop star Ariana Grande, many accompanied by their parents and some clutching the pink balloons Ms. Grande had sent sweetly raining down at the end of her concert, is particularly wrenching.

By Tuesday, 22 people had died, and 59 others had been hospitalized, some with life-threatening injuries. The dead included 8-year-old Saffie Rose Roussos, who had come with her mother and older sister, and 18-year-old Georgina Bethany Callander, who had posted an image of her brand new driver’ license on Instagram.

The Islamic State said one of its “oldiers”ad carried out the bombing, which took the life of the man British police officials believe was behind it, Salman Abedi, a 22-year-old whose parents emigrated from Libya. It is still unclear whether Mr. Abedi acted alone or as part of a network. No one yet knows what motivated him to commit such a horrific deed. It is also unclear whether the Islamic State’ claim is legitimate. Only further investigation can answer these questions.

Meanwhile, as hard as it is amid the shock and the mourning, it is important to recognize this attack for what it is: an attempt to shake Britain —nd, by extension, the rest of Europe and the West —o its core, and to provoke a thirst for vengeance and a desire for absolute safety so intense, it will sweep away the most cherished democratic values and the inclusiveness of diverse societies.

The Islamic State wants nothing more than to watch Western democracies embrace its mad version of a holy war pitting Muslims against Christians, the newly arrived against others. This has been the goal of other attacks in Europe. With cold calculation, extremists have ripped apart the lives of people simply out enjoying themselves —hether at a concert or sitting around cafe tables in Paris in November 2015, or gathering for Bastille Day fireworks in Nice last year, or shopping at a Christmas market in Berlin in December.

Maximum vigilance is needed, and Britain raised its threat level from severe to critical. Public spaces must be made as safe as possible, even as people recognize that more attacks will very likely occur, despite our best defenses. In Britain, as in the rest of Europe and in the United States, it is critical that immigrants, especially Muslims, are not stigmatized. As Richard Barrett, former director of global counterterrorism operations at MI6, Britain’ foreign intelligence agency, said, “ngaging the community and letting the community inform us”s one way “o understand why people do this”nd to prevent future attacks.

Understanding is critical. The quickest way for open societies to lose the freedoms they enjoy and the Islamic State seeks to destroy would be to whip up divisive ethnic, racist and religious hatreds. But there will be those who try. The Daily Telegraph columnist Allison Pearson tweeted on Tuesday: “e need a State of Emergency as France has. We need internment of thousands of terror suspects now to protect our children.”hen there was the unbelievably vile tweet by Katie Hopkins, a British commentator: “e need a final solution.”he later changed “inal”o “rue”n a new tweet after her original was widely condemned.

President Trump, who traveled to Europe on Tuesday after stops in Saudi Arabia and Israel, spoke to the British prime minister, Theresa May, and said what the world needs to hear: The United States stands with Britain. That spirit should bring together all citizens, of all countries, who —hatever their faith or birthplace —rieve now for the innocents cut down Monday night in Manchester.

Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion), and sign up for the Opinion Today newsletter.

* Terror Alert in Britain Is Raised to Maximum as \b ISIS\b0  Claims Manchester Attack

* Insidious Twist on Terror Attack Victims: Teens and Young Girls with Mothers in Tow

Document INHT000020170524ed5n0000f
