World News: U.S. Rejects Flight Ban Over Syria Zones --- Russia bars aircraft in four 'de-escalation' areas, but Washington says operations go on

By Thomas Grove in Moscow and Felicia Schwartz in Washington 
471 words
6 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A5
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A Russian envoy said U.S. aircraft are barred from flying over the "de-escalation zones" that Russia, Iran and Turkey recently agreed to establish in Syria, but U.S. officials dismissed the admonition as the U.S.-led coalition continues its operations to target Islamic State.

The disagreement left deeply uncertain the status of the zones that were established this week without explicit U.S. consent during talks on Syria in Kazakhstan.

Alexander Lavrentiev, Russian President Vladimir Putin 's envoy for Syria, didn't indicate what role Russian aircraft would have in enforcing the no-fly rule. The ban also applies to aircraft of the U.S.-led international coalition fighting Islamic State militants, said the envoy.

"From this time forward, these zones are closed for their flights . . . with or without notification," Mr. Lavrentiev was quoted as saying in the Kazakh capital Astana, where Russia, Iran and Turkey signed a memorandum on Thursday to create at least four safe zones across Syria.

The zones being set up under the agreement are intended to bolster fragile cease-fires and allow for the delivery of humanitarian aid and the return of refugees, officials from the three nations said. U.S. officials had reacted warily to the agreement, saying any deal involving Iran was suspect and noting that past efforts to reduce violence in Syria had failed. After Mr. Lavrentiev's comments Friday, the Trump administration said it didn't plan to change the U.S. posture.

"As we said yesterday, the United States supports any effort that can genuinely de-escalate the violence in Syria, insure unhindered humanitarian access, focus energies on the defeat of ISIS and other terrorists, and create the conditions for a credible political resolution of the conflict," a State Department official said.

"The coalition will continue to strike ISIS targets in Syria," the official said. "The campaign to defeat ISIS will continue at the same relentless pace as it is proceeding now."

U.S. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke on the phone Friday to discuss "efforts to de-escalate the ongoing conflict in Syria," State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said. They will also meet next week on the sidelines of an Arctic Council meeting in Alaska.

Russia, Iran and Turkey support opposing sides in the war, with Moscow and Tehran backing the regime of President Bashar al-Assad and Ankara allied with rebel groups. Russian air support for ground operations by government forces and their allies has been crucial in tipping the war in the regime's favor.

---

Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.