Trump's Target in Syria Is Still  ISIS  --- Recent airstrikes don't mean administration plans to remove Assad from power

By Dion Nissenbaum and Ben Leubsdorf 
926 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

WASHINGTON -- The Trump administration saidits focus in Syria is the defeat of Islamic State, not pushing President Bashar al-Assad from power.

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and national security adviser H.R. McMaster, in separate interviews on Sunday, said the administration's decision last week to strike an Assad regime airfield wasn't a sign that the U.S. is now focused on toppling the Syrian leader.

"Our priority is first the defeat of ISIS," Mr. Tillerson told George Stephanopoulos on ABC. "Once we can eliminate the battle against ISIS, conclude that -- and it is going quite well -- then we hope to turn our attention to cease-fire agreements between the regime and opposition forces."

Lt. Gen. McMaster echoed Mr. Tillerson's comments in an interview on Fox News with Chris Wallace.

Questions about U.S. policy arose after President Donald Trump ordered airstrikes on a regime air base in northwestern Syria believed to be home to pilots that carried out a chemical weapons attack that killed at least 85 people, including 27 children.

Until last week, Mr. Trump and the administration had talked of Mr. Assad as a potential partner in the fight against Islamic State.

That all changed on Tuesday when Mr. Assad's regime used suspected chemical weapons. Mr. Trump said the graphic images of dead and dying Syrian children changed his views of Mr. Assad and triggered his decision to strike.

On Sunday, though, Mr. Tillerson said America's primary focus in Syria is destroying Islamic State, also known as ISIS, which is the focus of an intensifying U.S. military campaign targeting the extremist group's de facto capital in Raqqa.

His remarks came a day after, Islamic State militants attacked a U.S.-led coalition base in al-Tanf, a town in southern Syria along the Jordan border used by American special-operation forces and Syrian rebels working with the U.S. coalition, triggering a fierce fight that required coalition airstrikes to repel, U.S. military officials said.

The president and secretary of state, along with United Nations Ambassador Nikki Haley, said the U.S. sees no future for Mr. Assad in Syria.

"Regime change is something that we think is going to happen, because all of the parties are going to see that Assad's not the leader that needs to be taking place for Syria,"Ms. Haley said on CNN.

The U.S. is looking into what Russia may have known about last week's attack. Russian forces operate side by side with Syrian forces at the Shayrat Airfield, which was targeted by the U.S. strike.

U.S. military officials said last week that they were trying to determine if a Russian pilot hit a rebel field hospital where victims of the chemical-weapons attack were taken for treatment.

While U.S. military officials said they have no firm evidence that Russia was involved in the strike, Ms. Haley said Moscow either knew about the use of chemical weapons, or it is dangerously ignorant of what its Syrian ally is doing.

The U.S. military estimates it destroyed 20 Syrian regime aircraft when it fired nearly 60 cruise missiles at the Syrian airfield on Thursday.

But the U.S. strikes didn't destroy the runway, an intentional decision that allowed the regime to resume airstrikes against rebel forces within hours of the attack.

Sen. Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) said the resumption of flights from the base appeared to be a crude message to the U.S. "Assad's telling Trump by flying from this base: 'F-you,' " Mr. Graham said on Sunday on NBC. "And I think he's making a serious mistake."

Mr. Graham and Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz.) have called on the U.S. to strike all of Mr. Assad's airfields to cripple his ability to carry out airstrikes on regime forces.

The U.S. military looked at taking that step, Mr. McCain said, but Mr. Trump ultimately embraced the modest strike on the single airfield.

---

Assad Regime Keeps

Up Airstrikes

The Syrian regime, emboldened by support from allies Russia and Iran, stepped up airstrikes against the opposition over the weekend, according to antigovernment activists who alleged the government had launched more attacks with chemical weapons. President Bashar al-Assad's government showed no sign it was deterred by the U.S. cruise missile strike on one of its air bases last week in retaliation for an alleged chemicals weapons attack on the opposition-held town of Khan Sheikhoun that killed at least 89 people -- many of them children.

Mr. Assad said Sunday the U.S. failed in achieving the goal of the attack and affirmed that the Syrian military was determined to eliminate terrorism in every part of the country, according to state media. The Syrian regime refers to most of its opponents as terrorists. "The Iranian people are still standing by the Syrian nation," Iranian President Hassan Rouhani told Mr. Assad in a phone call, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency. In a call with Russian President Vladimir Putin, Mr. Rouhani pledged closer cooperation with Syria and Russia, according to the Iranian president's official website. "In such an atmosphere, strengthening cooperation among Iran, Russia and Syria in the confrontation with violence and terror is necessary," he said.

-- Raja Abdulrahim and Noam Raydan

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170410ed4a0001q
