world
 ISIS  Officially Taunts Trump, Ending a Conspicuous Silence

By RUKMINI CALLIMACHI 
785 words
4 April 2017
International New York Times
INHT
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Although members and supporters of the Islamic State have frequently commented on President Trump and his policies, analysts have been puzzled by the terrorist group’ official silence about him. Mr. Trump had not been mentioned in any of the group’ official media —ll frequent venues for criticism or taunting of former President Barack Obama and other world leaders.

More than two months after Mr. Trump was sworn in as president, the Islamic State’ spokesman on Tuesday released the group’ first official statement on him, in an audio recording calling him an “diot”nd deriding his attacks on Muslims, among other claims.

Even then, Mr. Trump was only indirectly insulted rather than called out by name.

“merica, you have drowned and there is no savior; you have become prey for the soldiers of the caliphate in every part of the Earth; you are bankrupt, and the signs of your demise are evident to every eye,”he spokesman said, according to a translation by Reuters. “here is no more evidence than the fact that you are being run by an idiot who does not know what Syria or Iraq or Islam is.”

Some terrorism experts have called some of Mr. Trump’ statements and policies —articularly his ban on visas for people from a selection of predominantly Muslim countries — potential boon to propaganda by the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. The group has long asserted that Muslims are victims of discrimination and abuse in the West, and supporters and members of the Islamic State have seized on some of Mr. Trump’ statements as evidence of hostility toward Muslims.

“ ask Allah to deliver America to Trump,”ne supporter of the Islamic State said during the presidential campaign in a Telegram post archived by Mara Revkin, a resident fellow at the Abdallah S. Kamel Center for the Study of Islamic Law and Civilization at Yale Law School.

During the Mosul offensive, a civilian trapped in an area of the city under Islamic State control told The New York Times by telephone that the group’ fighters on his street were jokingly calling Mr. Trump’ executive travel order “ blessed ban.”

Amarnath Amarasingam, a senior research fellow at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue in London, has interviewed supporters of the Islamic State regarding this disconnect.

“he longer-term goal of ISIS is to let the United States eat itself from the inside —ust let it happen,”e said.

By contrast, Mr. Obama was frequently named in Islamic State publications and statements.

Mr. Amarasingam argued that was because the group saw Mr. Obama’ relatively better image in the Muslim world as more troubling.

“hey assumed that with him,”e said, referring to the Islamic State’ views on Mr. Obama, “ou need to tease out those subtleties. ‘e calls Muslims part of American family, but he doesn’ really believe that.’hereas with Trump, he openly declared Islam hates us. There are no subtleties to unmask.”

The new recording by Abu Hassan, the Islamic State’ spokesman, is only the second one publicly released. The first was four months ago.

He is considered to be a little-known figure who moved into the post after the group’ long-serving spokesman, Abu Muhammad al-Adnani, was killed last year in an airstrike.

The speech makes references to current events, including the ongoing offensive in Mosul. In closing, Abu Hassan appears to also make a reference to the recent bombing in St. Petersburg, calling on supporters, including in Russia, to rise up.

“ monotheists in America, Europe and Russia! O supporters of the caliphate; you who have listened to the call to fight!”e said, according to a translation provided by the SITE Intelligence Group. “ou are today a knife in the backs of the polytheists, so roll up your sleeves.”

Follow Rukmini Callimachi on Twitter @rcallimachi. Reporting was contributed by Liam Stack and Yousur al-Hlou in New York, Hwaida Saad in Beirut, Omar al-Jawoshy in Baghdad, and an employee of the New York Times in Mosul, Iraq.

PHOTO: The “ Am a Muslim Too”ally in February in Times Square. Some terrorism experts have called some of President Trump’ statements and policies a potential boon to propaganda by ISIS. (PHOTOGRAPH BY EDUARDO MUNOZ ALVAREZ/GETTY IMAGES)

* Jared Kushner Meets With Iraqi Leader on Future of \b ISIS\b0  Battle

* At Site of Deaths, Our Reporters Find Cost of U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  Battle

* Trump’ \b ISIS\b0  Plan, as Described by Tillerson, Sounds Like Obama’

* New \b ISIS\b0  Tactic: Gather Mosul’ Civilians, Then Lure an Airstrike

Document INHT000020170405ed440000w
