World
Islamic State Fighters Trying to Aid Convoy Are Easy Targets; Buses transporting hundreds of Islamic State fighters have been stuck for nearly a week after U.S. airstrikes blocked them

By Margherita Stancati 
768 words
4 September 2017
21:57
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State said Monday a convoy of militants stranded in Syria has proved an unexpected boon, drawing other fighters from the extremist group seeking to reach the buses into the open and turning them into easy targets.

The buses, which were supposed to transport hundreds of Islamic State fighters and their families from the Lebanese border in southwestern Syria to a town in eastern Syria near the Iraqi border, have been stuck for nearly a week after U.S. airstrikes blocked them from reaching their destination. They were being evacuated under a controversial deal brokered by the Iran-backed Lebanese militant group Hezbollah that the U.S. opposed.

"It has been quite lucrative for the coalition because of all the assets that ISIS has put toward it," said the coalition spokesman, U.S. Army Col. Ryan Dillon. "They have exposed themselves as part of this event, and we were able to capitalize on it," he said. "It presented an opportunity for the coalition to strike and remove several ISIS fighters and resources from the battlefield."

The buses were en route to Deir Ezzour province in eastern Syria, one of last remaining strongholds of Islamic State.

U.S. airstrikes cratered a road and destroyed a bridge to prevent the convoy from advancing and have repeatedly targeted Islamic State fighters trying to reach the buses. Col. Dillon said so far, some 85 militants and more than 40 vehicles have been hit by airstrikes. The strikes also targeted artillery systems, pickup trucks mounted with weapons and a tank.

Over the weekend, the convoy split up, with six of the 17 buses that originally left the Lebanese border turning back into Syrian-government controlled territory outside Deir Ezzour province. They stopped near the Syrian village of al-Sukhnah, said the coalition, which continues to monitor the 11 stranded buses. The coalition has refused to strike the buses directly because there are women and children on board. About 300 Islamic State fighters and 300 of their relatives evacuated Syria's mountainous border area with Lebanon after the Lebanese army and Syrian government forces backed by Hezbollah launched simultaneous but separate offensives against the group from both sides of the border.

"We know where they are right now. ISIS wants to continue to put fighters and resources to rescue them, and we will continue striking them," said Col. Dillon.

The fighting stopped after Hezbollah reached a deal with Islamic State to allow safe passage to the militants and their families through Syria in exchange for information on the fate of eight Lebanese soldiers who had been kidnapped by the group in 2014. Their remains have been retrieved by Lebanese authorities.

As part of the agreement, Islamic State handed over the bodies of two Hezbollah fighters and of an Iranian military adviser, according to a Hezbollah official and Iranian state media. Islamic State still has a Hezbollah prisoner and the remains of two dead Hezbollah fighters that the Lebanese militant group will be able to retrieve only when and if the convoy reaches Deir Ezzour, the Hezbollah official said.

The saga of the convoy has unfolded as the U.S.-led coalition and forces loyal to the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad are both converging on Deir Ezzour to try to oust Islamic State from one of its last remaining strongholds. Iran and Hezbollah are key allies propping up Mr. Assad's forces on the battlefield.

Rami Abdulrahman, the head of the U.K.-based opposition monitoring group Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, said reports from the ground indicate many of those on the convoy have quietly left the buses over the past two days.

Officials in Iraq's Anbar province, which borders eastern Syria, said Islamic State fighters accompanied by relatives recently reached the towns of Rawah and Aana.

"Around 100 militants reached the areas of Rawa and Annah from Deir Ezzour in Syria. It's not sure if they are the same from the convoy," said Qatari al-Samarmad, a tribal leader in Anbar who commands a group of tribal forces fighting Islamic State.

Col. Dillon said the coalition has no evidence indicating some passengers have fled, but is not ruling out the possibility.

Leena Saidi in Beirut, Ghassan Adnan in Baghdad and Nour Alakraa in Berlin contributed to this article.

Write to Margherita Stancati at margherita.stancati@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170904ed94003h1
