World News: Iraqi Forces Beat Back  ISIS  Counterattack --- Islamic State fighters reclaim parts of western Mosul before being pushed back

By Ben Kesling, Awadh Altaie and Ghassan Adnan 
421 words
15 June 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

ERBIL, Iraq -- Islamic State fighters armed with machine guns and wearing suicide vests launched a counterattack against Iraqi government forces in western Mosul, police officials said, briefly retaking control of some city blocks before they were beaten back.

In the operation early Wednesday, at least 50 Islamic State fighters slipped from their positions in the Old City, with some moving down the bank of the Tigris River and evading defenses established by U.S.-backed Iraqi forces, said Col. Faris Radhi, a top official in Iraq's Federal Police.

Underscoring the resilience of the estimated hundreds of Islamic State fighters still in the Old City, the militants swept into the Dendan neighborhood and set houses on fire, sending plumes of black smoke into the sky in what police said was an attempt to hamper air support for Iraqi government forces on the ground.

The death toll of civilians and combatants wasn't immediately known, as government forces continued to search the area late Wednesday, Col. Radhi said. Islamic State said it killed 40 police and seized weapons in the attack.

Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led international coalition fighting against Islamic State, said no ground had been lost to Islamic State in Wednesday's fighting. He didn't respond to questions whether smoke from the burning houses impaired efforts to provide coalition air support for government ground forces.

Since driving Islamic State from eastern Mosul in January, Iraqi forces have seized large swaths of territory in the west of the city and have largely bottled up the militants in a small area of the Old City.

Dendan abuts the southern edge of the Old City and was retaken by government forces from Islamic State months ago. Federal Police established defenses there, and some people had moved back into their homes nearby.

The government's campaign to take out Islamic State from Mosul began in October, and in recent weeks, government forces have sought to complete and tighten their encirclement of the Old City, where tens of thousands of civilians are also believed to be holed up in addition to the militants.

The fighting to remove Islamic State from its last stronghold in the city is expected to be especially brutal because of the neighborhood's densely packed buildings and narrow, twisting streets.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170615ed6f00016
