U.K. Terror Attack: Suspect's Visits To Libya Reflect  ISIS 's Influence

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
373 words
25 May 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A11
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Outside Iraq and Syria, the radicals of Islamic State administered territory in only one other country: Libya.

As British investigators search for links between Islamic State and the Manchester bombing, focus has turned to the North African country, where the militant group ruled one of the oil-rich nation's most important cities and used it to stage terrorist attacks and train foreign fighters.

Salman Abedi, the 22-year-old man thought by British authorities to have carried out the bombing for which Islamic State claimed responsibility, was a British citizen of Libyan descent. His journeys in and out of a country where the militant group once cast a large shadow are now a central focus of investigators, a Western security official said.

For more than a year, Islamic State controlled the port city of Sirte, imposing its signature brutal rule and exploiting the anarchy of the politically divided country to train and slip fighters into neighboring Tunisia, where they targeted European tourists.

Since a powerful western Libyan militia, aided by U.S. airstrikes, ousted it from Sirte in December, the group's foothold in the country has shrunk, but in a land where rival governments are vying for control, European and Arab officials remain concerned about the group's ability to mount attacks abroad.

Last year, the U.S. planned to kill an Islamic State leader from France who was using the messaging app Telegram to threaten his native country with bloodshed, a Western security official said. He also sent fellow Europeans to France, possibly to carry out attacks, the official said.

The militant leader, however, was hiding at the Sirte power station and any airstrike could have caused electricity blackouts across large parts of Libya, so no raid was launched, the official said. The French militant's current location is unknown.

In January, the U.S. bombed Islamic State training camps in Libya's desert interior, illustrating Washington's concern over the continued threat posed by the group but also underscoring how far it had been pushed from the country's more heavily populated Mediterranean coast.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170525ed5p0000w
