
World
Iraqi Kurds Plan to Vote on Independence, Despite Court Ruling; After Iraqi Supreme Court halts next week's referendum, Kurdish region's foreign relations minister says it will still be held

By Ben Kesling in Baghdad and Paul Sonne at the United Nations 
955 words
19 September 2017
03:46
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A ruling from Iraq's Supreme Court halting an independence referendum next week in the semiautonomous Kurdish region will have no bearing on the vote, the Kurdish region's foreign relations minister said Monday, vowing to proceed with the plebiscite anyway.

Falah Mustafa, foreign relations minister for the Kurdistan regional government, said the judicial system in Iraq had been politicized long ago and had failed to uphold constitutional guarantees to the Kurds.

"We don't have the feeling that there is a judiciary system in this country that's functioning in order to protect law, order and also rights," Mr. Mustafa said in an interview on the sidelines of the United Nations General Assembly in New York. "This decision in no way will affect the region of Kurdistan, the feelings of the people of Kurdistan or the leadership."

Iraq's Supreme Court ruled Monday that the Kurdish region should temporarily halt the independence referendum scheduled for next week, marking the latest opposition—oth local and international—o the vote the Iraqi Kurds have called aiming to carve a new country out of Iraq.

The temporary court order came after Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a staunch opponent of the referendum, filed a request to the court to declare the vote unconstitutional. The court did not say when it would make a final decision on the matter.

In recent days, U.S. and international diplomats have shuttled back and forth to the country in a last-ditch effort to convince the Kurds to wait on the vote, scheduled for Sept. 25.

The White House on Friday issued a statement against the effort. The United Nations also opposes the timeline, saying it will distract against the fight against Islamic State. Kurdish forces, known as the Peshmerga, have played a critical role in the U.S.-led campaign against Islamic State.

"We don't support the planned Kurdish referendum on Sept. 25 because we feel that that takes the eye off the ball of ISIS and that we should all remain focused on ISIS," State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said last week.

The U.S. has warned of increased instability and violence as a result of such a referendum—n eventuality Kurdish officials dismiss.

Brett McGurk, the U.S. special presidential envoy to the counter-ISIS coalition, said last week there is no international support or legitimacy for the referendum and urged Kurdish officials to find an alternative path.

But the region's president, Masoud Barzani, so far has refused all such entreaties, a move senior Western diplomats said indicated he could be holding out for greater concessions.

Kurdish officials say a door is still open to postpone the referendum but only if the U.S. and other nations urging a delay to the vote agree to uphold the result when the time comes.

"There have been some papers forwarded but they have not been to the level of our expectation, nor what we wanted to get," Mr. Mustafa said. "We have been approached by the United States, the United Kingdom, the United Nations and other countries in the neighborhood, but still we are not there."

Mr. Mustafa said the proposals still envisioned Kurdistan as part of a federalized Iraq, but for years Baghdad has failed to uphold its obligations to the semiautonomous region.

"We are not ready to go back to the old formula," he said. "We are not ready to go back to pre-ISIS Iraq. It has failed, and we are not to be blamed for it. Baghdad is to be blamed for it."

Mr. Mustafa said so far the offers from the U.S. and other partner nations fell short of guaranteeing the independence the Kurdish region seeks. To delay the referendum, Kurdish authorities need the U.S. and other nations to issue "a clear statement about the right to self determination and the right of our nation to be independent in the future," he said.

The top Kurdish official said his region wouldn't declare independence the day after the referendum but rather would take the popular mandate to Baghdad and begin talks on an amicable split. He urged the U.S. and other nations to begin preparing for those talks.

Mr. Abadi on Saturday said he would consider deploying Iraqi troops and using military force if the referendum triggers violence.

Voting is scheduled to take place not just in predominantly Kurdish area, where the referendum is likely to be wildly popular, but in ethnically mixed areas whose populations have been shuffled and displaced by the continuing war against Islamic State.

Mr. Mustafa, asked about Mr. Abadi's comments said: "We don't believe that Prime Minister Abadi means it, because we hope that these days are over when armies will be used to sort out critical differences."

Iraqi Kurds have long sought independence. They chafed under the rule of late dictator Saddam Hussein, who eventually granted them de facto semiautonomous status, and they built on that status after his ouster in 2003.

Today, the region fields its own military, the Peshmerga. It doesn't require visitors to obtain an Iraqi visa to enter despite the fact is technically Iraqi soil, instead making only some visitors get a Kurdish visa.

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com and Paul Sonne at paul.sonne@wsj.com

Related

* Iraq's Supreme Court Tells Kurds to Suspend Independence Referendum

* Planned Kurdish Referendum on Independence Unsettles Iraqis, U.S.

Document WSJO000020170919ed9j0008d
