World News: U.S. Strikes in Syria to Halt  ISIS  Evacuees --- Actions aim to thwart deal made by Hezbollah to let fighters, families relocate to Iraqi border

By Nancy A. Youssef in Washington and Margherita Stancati in Beirut 
825 words
31 August 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The U.S. military on Wednesday carried out two airstrikes aimed at stopping hundreds of Islamic State militants evacuated from the Lebanese-Syrian border from relocating to an extremist stronghold in Syria near the border with Iraq.

The first of the strikes came shortly after the U.S. criticized a deal brokered by the Lebanese militia Hezbollah that allowed hundreds of Islamic State militants and their families free passage out of an area straddling Syria's southwestern border with Lebanon near the Syrian town of Qarah. Their convoy left Monday and was headed to al-Bukamal, a town in eastern Syria's Deir Ezzour province very close to the Iraqi border.

"We created a crater. It was to block them so they could not continue on the road," a U.S. defense official said on Wednesday, adding the coalition didn't strike the buses because family members were present.

That airstrike, which also destroyed a bridge, took place after the convoy entered Deir Ezzour province, one of Islamic State's last strongholds in Syria, from territory controlled by the government of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad.

The U.S. Central Command said that within two hours of the first strike, it conducted a strike west of Deir Ezzour on a handful of logistical vehicles that were known to be affiliated with Islamic State. That strike may have killed Islamic State fighters, the U.S. military said.

"Irreconcilable #ISIS terrorists should be killed on the battlefield, not bused across #Syria to the Iraqi border without #Iraq's consent," Brett McGurk, U.S. President Donald Trump's special envoy for combating Islamic State, tweeted ahead of the airstrike. "Our @coalition will help ensure that these terrorists can never enter #Iraq or escape from what remains of their dwindling 'caliphate.' "

U.S. military officials said they would continue to closely watch those in the convoy, but wouldn't specify what action they would take. They could decide to gather intelligence on the group's movements and possibly take action against those confirmed to be Islamic State fighters. U.S. officials say they don't want the fighters to end up on the border of Iraq.

The direct military action to thwart a deal made by Hezbollah comes after the U.S. deliberately targeted the Syrian regime for the first time in April, when it launched nearly 60 Tomahawk missiles on a government air base in response to a chemical weapons attack that killed at least 85 people.

Since then U.S. fighter jets have downed an Iranian drone and a Syrian warplane over Syria. At the same time, however, Washington has signaled it won't stand in the way of the Assad regime taking back territory U.S.-backed forces have wrested from Islamic State around its former stronghold of Raqqa.

Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi, a U.S. ally, criticized the deal setting up the evacuation of Islamic State personnel.

"We consider it an insult to the Iraqi people. Moving this number of terrorists for such a long distance through Syria is unacceptable," Mr. Abadi told reporters on Tuesday night. "We are fighting terrorism in Iraq and we are killing them in Iraq. We don't send them to Syria."

U.S.-backed Iraqi forces are battling Islamic State, recently ousting the group from Mosul, Iraq's second-largest city, and the strategic town of Tal Afar near the Syrian border. Syrian government officials in the past have accused the U.S.-led coalition battling Islamic State of allowing some of the group's fighters to flee Mosul into Syria.

The Lebanese army this month launched a ground operation in the country's mountainous northeast to clear it of Islamic State militants who controlled the territory for about three years. Syrian government forces and Hezbollah pressed a simultaneous but separate offensive from the Syrian side of the border.

The fighting stopped on Sunday after Hezbollah negotiated the cease-fire and evacuation agreement with Islamic State in return for information on the fate of nine Lebanese soldiers who were kidnapped by the group in 2014. Eight bodies believed to belong to the soldiers have since been retrieved by Lebanese authorities.

Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah on Wednesday defended the agreement, saying it was necessary to establish what had happened to the missing soldiers.

"A comprehensive military solution was possible and easy, but we would have lost the cause [of trying to determine] the fate of the Lebanese soldiers," Mr. Nasrallah said in a statement. He also said the transfer of some 300 militants to Deir Ezzour wouldn't make a difference on the battlefield.

---

Nour Alakraa in Berlin contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170831ed8v0001d
