Briefing
Donald Trump , Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, ‘ll Eyez on Me’ Your Friday Briefing

By CHRIS STANFORD 
1,393 words
16 June 2017
11:36
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’ the sign-up .)

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•rump and Russia.

Members of President Trump’ transition team were ordered on Thursday to preserve documents and other materials  related to the investigation into Russian interference in the presidential election, according to a memo obtained by The Times.

As director of the F.B.I., Robert Mueller stayed above partisan politics. But as special counsel overseeing the Trump-Russia investigation, he’ dealing with the most charged political brawl of his career .

Mr. Trump again called the Russia investigation a “itch hunt” on Thursday, and the deputy attorney general encouraged Americans  to be “keptical about anonymous allegations.”

Vice President Mike Pence has hired a defense lawyer  to help guide him through the investigations facing the White House.

•ussia says it may have killed ISIS leader.

Russia’ military said today that it was looking into whether an airstrike in Syria had killed one of the world’ most wanted terrorists: Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi , the self-declared caliph of the Islamic State.

The strike on May 28 hit a meeting of the militant group’ leaders outside Raqqa, the group’ de facto capital.

The U.S. said it couldn’ confirm the Russian report.

•ow we became enemies.

Democratic and Republican voters don’ just disagree about health care or President Trump. Many despise the other side, to a degree that political scientists and pollsters say has worsened significantly  over the last 50 years.

But on Thursday, Washington signaled a moment of bipartisanship  with a call to action: Play ball! Lawmakers gathered for a charity baseball game a day after Representative Steve Scalise, a member of the Republican team, was shot at a practice. Doctors said on Thursday that he was improving but faces additional operations .

We traced the steps of the suspect  before the shooting and assessed rumors  that spread afterward.

•lso from Washington.

•resident Trump is expected to announce a clampdown on travel and commercial ties  between the U.S. and Cuba today, reversing an Obama administration rapprochement.

•enate Republican leaders are writing legislation to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act without a single hearing on the bill , a process that has raised alarm in both parties.

•ormer captive has brain injury.

After Otto Warmbier, a 22-year-old American student, was freed from captivity in North Korea, his father said the country had “rutalized and terrorized” his son.

•oday in court.

•urors in Bill Cosby’ sexual assault trial return for a fifth day of deliberations . On Thursday, they said they were deadlocked.

• verdict is expected this morning in the trial of a Massachusetts woman  who repeatedly encouraged her boyfriend to kill himself.

•“he Daily,”our audio news report.

In today’ show, we discuss the complexities of the Bill Cosby and Massachusetts trials.

Listen on a computer , an iOS device  or an Android device .

Business

•resident Trump ordered an expansion of federally funded apprenticeship programs .

Our European economics correspondent also looked at  cautionary tales  from the rest of the world about private investment in public works, a key part of the administration’ infrastructure plan.

•Jeff Bezos , Amazon ’ founder and chief executive, is on his way to becoming the world’ richest person .

We asked him about his philanthropic goals. He then asked Twitter .

•.S. stocks were down  on Thursday. Here’ a snapshot of global markets .

Smarter Living

•ffhand comments (good and bad) can have a remarkable shelf life .

•ecipe of the day: Grilling supercharges this Caesar salad .

Noteworthy

•eet Peru’ hairless dogs.

In today’ 360 video , a breeder in Lima says the dogs are “s important as Machu Picchu”o the country’ cultural history.

•ondon’ new normal.

Under the threat of terrorism, residents are a little spooked these days.

Our correspondent writes : “or the fourth time in 12 weeks I marked myself safe on Facebook . In Britain.”

The death toll in a horrific high-rise fire rose to 30 today , as the authorities said a full accounting might be impossible because some victims may never be identified.

•“hat was a beautiful experience.”

On a balmy Friday evening in May, Flint Northwestern High School held its prom.

For the students, it was a chance to set aside anxieties about the Michigan city’ three-year-old water crisis, its poverty and its gun violence. We tagged along .

•eady for the weekend.

At the movies, we review “Cars 3 ” “All Eyez on Me ,” fictionalized biography of the rapper Tupac Shakur; and “Rough Night ,”tarring Scarlett Johansson and Kate McKinnon.

We also check in with Katy Perry, who has a new album  and says she no longer wants to be a frothy pop star. And we review Lorde’ latest .

Big Brother is arriving on Broadway , with contemporary political resonance, as “984”omes to the Hudson Theater.

Speaking of dystopian fiction, Margaret Atwood talked to us  about Hulu ’ TV adaptation of her novel “he Handmaid’ Tale.”

The Book Review recommends eight   titles .

Finally, Sunday is Father’ Day in the U.S. and many other countries. Looking for a way to treat dear ol’ad? Our Cooking editors have some ideas .

•est of late-night TV.

What is a witch hunt? Comedy hosts disputed   President Trump’ definition .

•uotation of the day.

“t’ early in the game to begin to impugn the prosecutors.”

—Philip Allen Lacovara , a former Watergate prosecutor, on a push by President Trump and his allies to question the impartiality of Robert Mueller.

Back Story

Today is Bloomsday, a special day on the literary calendar.

James Joyce, the groundbreaking Irish novelist chose to immortalize June 16, 1904 , in his novel “lysses”ecause it was the date of his first outing with his future wife, Nora Barnacle.

It is named after Leopold Bloom , whom the book follows on a daylong picaresque voyage through Dublin, Joyce’ hometown. More than a century later, the character’ “dyssey”s celebrated around the world with readings, re-enactments and, sometimes, heavy drinking.

“lysses”s no easy summer read. A review  when it was published in 1922 compared the prose to the “roductions of the Ouija board.”

But help is a tap away.

There are now apps , including one that uses a touch screen to untangle tough sentences, plus an explanatory podcast . A group of Boston College students is developing a “lysses”ame , “oycestick.”

“f it’ so hard to read,”he illustrator Robert Berry once asked , “hy are people having so much fun with it?”

Have a great Bloomsday.

Charles McDermid contributed reporting.

_____

Photographs may appear out of order for some readers. Viewing this version of the briefing  should help.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning .

What would you like to see here? Contact us at  briefing@nytimes.com   .

You can sign up here  to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.

Steve Garvey, a former major league star, led a prayer before the congressional baseball game in Washington on Thursday. | Al Drago/The New York Times | A still from a video released by the Islamic State in 2014, believed to show Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in Mosul, Iraq. | via Reuters | Fred Warmbier held a news conference in Wyoming, Ohio, on Thursday, wearing the same jacket that his son wore during a courtroom appearance last year in North Korea. | Bill Pugliano/Getty Images | Steel and concrete barriers have been installed on London Bridge and other major bridges to protect pedestrians. | Matt Dunham/Associated Press | Students gathered outside Flint Northwestern High School before the school’ prom for what is known as the catwalk. “t’ like a fashion show,”aid one student. “t’ a bunch of yelling and screaming. You walk, you stop, and everybody wants to take your picture.” Zackary Canepari for The New York Times | James Joyce in Paris with Sylvia Beach, who published “lysses.” James Joyce Collection at SUNY Buffalo | Meet some Peruvian hairless dogs, an ancient breed whose image is recognizable on pre-Incan pottery. The breed has been declared a part of Peru’ cultural patrimony. | By KASSIE BRACKEN and KAITLYN MULLIN 

Document NYTFEED020170616ed6g00335
