World
Trump to Add Some Muscle to U.S. Strategy to Fight Islamic State; President to consider options that are expected to include sending more troops to Syria and Iraq, according to U.S. officials

By Gordon Lubold, Dion Nissenbaum and Julian Barnes 
1,079 words
24 February 2017
02:30
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump's new strategy to accelerate the fight against Islamic State will, at least initially, tweak and add a little more muscle to the existing plan, U.S. officials said.

Defense Secretary Jim Mattis is expected to provide to Mr. Trump a series of recommendations for that plan in the coming days. Mr. Trump on Jan. 28 signed an order directing his new Pentagon chief to come up with a preliminary draft of the plan to fight Islamic State within 30 days.

The president will consider a range of options that are expected to include sending additional troops to Syria and Iraq, at least in limited numbers, according to U.S. officials.

Two other possible steps could involve loosening battlefield restrictions, the officials said. One such step would give commanders more decision-making power on the use of U.S. forces in the field. A second would ease rules designed to minimize civilian casualties, according to U.S. officials. Loosening the civilian casualty rules would have the effect of increasing the number and rate of operations against Islamic State, officials said.

"What we're trying to do …s to outline the options that exist for dealing with the ISIS threat …ut also to clearly outline for him the consequences, the opportunity costs, the risks associated with each one of the options that we present," said the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joe Dunford, at a think-tank event in Washington. Gen. Dunford declined to answer questions about the changes.

There's little indication that Mr. Trump's ultimate decision will fundamentally shake up the existing approach, said U.S. officials and analysts, which relies heavily on indigenous forces taking on the fight against Islamic State with limited numbers of American advisers following closely behind.

American and foreign diplomats have pointed to the Trump administration's decision to keep Obama administration holdover Brett McGurk on as the State Department's coordinator for the U.S. coalition against Islamic State as a sign that the U.S. approach to the conflict is unlike to change dramatically in the short term.

"There will be some difference in terms of rules of engagement, the number of advise-and-assist and [special operations forces] elements involved, but I don't think it's going to be dramatically different," said Kathleen Hicks, director of the international security program at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. "The plan as it's being executed right now is proving to be quite successful. They will take the best of that and build out areas that they think need to be beefed up."

Some adjustments in the U.S. approach already have been made within the past month, Gen. Dunford said. And last fall, battlefield commanders were given more latitude in making their own decisions about conducting airstrikes, and American troops in Iraq now are operating in closer proximity to their Iraqi counterparts.

Mr. Trump also is expected to decide whether to directly arm the Kurdish force known as the People's Protection Units, or YPG, a move thought to be key to the elimination of Islamic State by breaking its grip on its de facto capital of Raqqa in Syria.

A decision by Mr. Trump to directly arm the YPG would anger Turkey, which classifies the group an extension of Kurdish separatists classified in Turkey as a terrorist group.

"What we don't want to do is bring [the president] options that solve one problem, only to create a second problem," Gen. Dunford said at the Brookings Institution on Thursday.

Many U.S. officials want to move quickly on Raqqa to prevent Islamic State leaders from escaping and setting up operations elsewhere to continue planning attacks on Western targets.

Turkey has offered to help with the fight for Raqqa, but only if the Kurds aren't part of the ground force, U.S. officials said. Kurdish fighters are willing to take part in the fight for Raqqa, but only if Turkey is excluded, the officials said.

Mr. Trump is aggressively exploring the option of creating informal safe zones in Syria, an idea that Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan has pushed for years. The Pentagon has long opposed the idea of creating official Syrian safe zones due to costs and necessary military commitments.

But there is growing receptiveness to the idea of setting up unofficial Syrian safe zones—hich some officials have dubbed "interim de-escalation areas"—long the Turkey and Jordan borders.

The zones wouldn't have to be new areas taken over by the U.S. military, as officials have explained them. One area in question in northern Syria along the Turkish border is now controlled by the Turkish military and the Syrian rebel groups backed by Ankara.

The Turkish military, backed by U.S. special operations forces and American airstrikes, entered Syria last August and Turkey and its allies and have seized more than 650 square miles of territory. Mr. Erdogan has vowed to create a 2,000-square-mile safe zone that would include housing for Syrian refugees.

Some U.S. officials see the area Turkey has created as a good place to expand a safe zone should the U.S. back such a policy, discussions that remain in the early stages, U.S. officials said.

If Mr. Trump expands the American presence in Iraq, Syria and beyond, it's likely that allies would be willing to contribute more.

France is willing to increase its military effort in Syria, for example, should the U.S. decide to step up its efforts there, according to a Western diplomat.

French officials told the U.S. last week in Europe that they'd like to see efforts in Raqqa be sped up, even if they don't want to see a radical change in strategy for the campaign in Syria, a diplomat said. No final decision on sending additional troops has been made by Paris as French officials await Mr. Trump's decisions.

Mathew Dalton contributed to this article.

Write to Gordon Lubold at Gordon.Lubold@wsj.com, Dion Nissenbaum at dion.nissenbaum@wsj.com and Julian Barnes at julian.barnes@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170224ed2o000b5
