US
Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Launch Airstrikes in Syria; The president had a transformative moment when he saw searing televised images of a chemical weapons attack in Syria, a senator says

By Carol E. Lee and Eli Stokols 
797 words
8 April 2017
01:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications President Donald Trump's first name was incorrectly omitted on first reference in an earlier version of this article. (April 12, 2017)

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump was in the Oval Office Tuesday morning as images of lifeless  children who had been gassed in Syria  were displayed on the medium he favors most: television.

He decided to respond, but had no clear plan.

What transpired over the next 57 hours was a series of decisions by a new president with no military or elected-office experience, leading to the first U.S. airstrikes  against the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad since the civil war began six years ago. The moment was a searing and potentially game-changing one for Mr. Trump, who has struggled to transform his success as a candidate into governing since he took office in January.

"That moment the other day was in some ways transformative," said Sen. Bob Corker (R., Tenn.), who spoke with Mr. Trump Thursday night after the U.S. launched 59 Tomahawk missiles onto an air base in northern Syria. "It was very evident to me that there became a real connection from him to what happened in Syria in a very personal way," Mr. Corker said. "I think he felt like he had no choice."

Mr. Trump's approach was a dramatic departure from the one his predecessor undertook when confronted with atrocities in Syria. President Barack Obama rarely showed emotion in public over Syria, let alone drew such a connection between his personal reaction to events and his decisions as commander-in-chief. Mr. Trump displayed both.

Details of the chemical weapons attack were first explained to Mr. Trump Tuesday around 10:30 a.m. during his daily intelligence briefing in the Oval Office. Later that morning, he saw the images unfold on TV, according to aides. "He immediately began to contemplate what this would mean going forward," a senior administration official said. "He wanted to be presented with a lot of options."

Mr. Trump spent several hours on Tuesday in meetings and on the phone working through a response. He met with his military advisers around 8 p.m. On Wednesday morning, Mr. Trump met again with his team, and then welcomed King Abdullah II of Jordan  to the White House. Around 3 p.m., after lunch with the king, Mr. Trump returned to the Situation Room, the secure facility in the White House, and told aides he wanted a "proportional response."

At that meeting, Mr. Trump narrowed the scope to three options : two military—ne more aggressive than the other—nd a third, nonmilitary option involving a package of diplomatic and economic measures. He told his advisers he wanted more information about each.

On Thursday, at a meeting around 1:30 p.m. on Air Force One, Mr. Trump narrowed his options to two, and ultimately chose the less-aggressive military option. Mr. Trump arrived at his Florida estate around 4 p.m., met with his team again, and ordered the strike. The advisers with the most sway with him were Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis , Secretary of State Rex Tillerson , National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster, Vice President Mike Pence and Jared Kushner , Mr. Trump's son-in-law and senior White House adviser, according to aides.

Mr. Trump's chief strategist Steve Bannon  argued against military strikes, two senior administration officials said. A separate senior official said no one argued in favor of the more-robust military option.

By 7:10 p.m., Mr. Trump had put on a tuxedo and, with first lady Melania Trump, went to dinner with Chinese President Xi Jinping , his wife and some cabinet officials and senior aides. As they dined on dry-aged New York strip steak, roasted root vegetables and chocolate cake, the U.S. military began firing missiles into Syria.

Senior officials moved between dinner and a nearby secure room , called a Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility, or SCIF, that the White House set up and where the operation was monitored. By the time Mr. Trump said goodbye to Mr. Xi, the missiles had hit. He informed the Chinese president as he walked him out and proceeded to the SCIF.

Write to Carol E. Lee at carol.lee@wsj.com 

Related Coverage

* Syria Strike Sends Russia a Signal 

* Nikki Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to ‘o More' in Syria 

* Timeline: First Major Military Campaigns by U.S. Presidents 

* Strike on Syria Angers Moscow, Shaking Up \b ISIS\b0  Fight 

* Congress Backs Trump, Debates Its Own Role In Military Strikes 

* U.S. Probes Possible Russian Role in Attack by Syria 

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Unlikely to Endanger Assad Rule 

Document WSJO000020170407ed4700bhx
