The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ Two Views From Mosul

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
557 words
28 March 2017
11:48
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen to ‘he Daily’ On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

Eleven days ago, an entire city block in Mosul, Iraq, was demolished. In the week and a half since, the cause of that devastation has been murky, clouded by competing narratives of what happened on that day.

On today’ episode:

Confusion surrounds a devastating airstrike believed to have killed at least 200 civilians in Iraq’ last ISIS stronghold. We present two views of what happened. One, an unspoken change in strategy inside the Trump administration. The other, a push for this change from America’ partners in Iraq frustrated by the restraint of President Barack Obama.

New York Times reporters Tim Arango and Rukmini Callimachi make sense of the situation.

Background reading:

•r. Arango on the cost of the U.S.-\b ISIS\b0  battle in Mosul.

•What we know about the airstrike that might have killed hundreds in Mosul.

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’ enough, we can even text.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called “odcasts” it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

Residents gather around the body of a man killed in Mosul in March. | Felipe Dana/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170328ed3s002jp
