Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Two Plead Guilty to Plotting Pressure-Cooker Bombing

By CHRISTOPHER MELE 
460 words
11 February 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
16
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

Two New York City men have pleaded guilty to federal charges that they plotted a pressure-cooker bomb attack in the city on behalf of the Islamic State, prosecutors said on Friday.

The men, Munther Omar Saleh, 21, of Queens, and Fareed Mumuni, 22, of Staten Island, were arrested in 2015.

Mr. Saleh searched online for materials needed to build a pressure-cooker bomb and looked at images of city tourist attractions in hopes of carrying out an attack, a federal complaint said. An ISIS fighter gave Mr. Mumuni the go-ahead for a suicide attack against law enforcement officers who were following the men, the United States Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York said in a statement.

A police officer for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey saw Mr. Saleh walking on and looking around the George Washington Bridge on two consecutive days. The authorities said he was also seen visiting a spy store in Queens and he later searched online for disguises.

Mr. Saleh was studying electrical circuitry at a college in Queens at the time of his arrest. A criminal complaint said he had translated Islamic State propaganda into English and criticized Al Qaeda as being ''too moderate.''

Mr. Saleh, Mr. Mumuni and others helped plan a New Jersey man's trip to ISIS-controlled territory, the statement said. Mr. Saleh accompanied the man, Nader Saadeh, to Kennedy International Airport, where Mr. Saadeh began his trip with a flight to Jordan. Mr. Saadeh was later arrested and pleaded guilty to conspiring to provide material support to ISIS.

Mr. Saleh pleaded guilty on Friday to charges of attempting to provide material support to ISIS and assaulting and conspiring to assault federal officers. Mr. Mumuni pleaded guilty on Thursday to the same charges, as well as attempted murder of federal officers. The attempted murder charge was the result of Mr. Mumuni repeatedly stabbing an F.B.I. agent in the torso with a large kitchen knife as the authorities carried out a search warrant at his home in June 2015. The agent sustained only minor injuries after the knife failed to penetrate his body armor, officials said.

Mr. Saleh faces up to 53 years in prison and Mr. Mumuni 85 years. They are scheduled to be sentenced on May 16.

Mr. Saleh is a United States citizen. Information on Mr. Mumuni's status was not available.

William F. Sweeney Jr., the assistant director in charge of the New York field office of the F.B.I., said in a statement that the ''guilty pleas show just how close the threat of homegrown terrorism exists for New York City.''

Document NYTF000020170211ed2b0006d
