World
U.S., Philippines Conduct Naval Patrol in Southeast Asian Waters; Joint maritime operation came amid rising fears over militant extremism and piracy in the region

By Ben Otto 
459 words
1 July 2017
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

The Philippine island of Mindanao has a Muslim minority population. An earlier version of this article incorrectly referred to Mindanao's population as predominantly Muslim. (July 4, 2017)

MANILA—he U.S. and the Philippine navies conducted a joint maritime patrol off the southern Philippines, as a battle with Islamic State-aligned militants raised fears that the conflict could spread to other parts of the region.

The U.S. Embassy in Manila said the patrol in the Sulu Sea, which it said came at the invitation of the Philippine government, aimed to combat piracy and other crime in the region.

The Sulu Sea is a largely lawless expanse of water between the southern Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia where piracy and kidnappings are common. The three nations last month started up joint patrols of the waters after the outbreak of fighting between Philippine troops and Islamic State-aligned militants on the island of Mindanao in the southern Philippines. The island is under martial law.

More than 400 people have been killed and 400,000 displaced in more than a month of fighting in the city of Marawi.

The Philippines says it is close to subduing around 100 militants holding hostages in the city, but authorities fear that foreign terrorists could join the fight via the porous southern border along the Sulu Sea.

The U.S. is a longtime ally of the Philippines, but signs of a pivot from the U.S. and toward China by President Rodrigo Duterte after he took office a year ago have raised questions about the state of the U.S.-Philippine alliance. Before Mr. Duterte came to power, the U.S. wound down a 13-year task force aimed at countering Muslim extremism in the region.

The U.S. embassy said in a statement that the patrol "further demonstrates U.S. commitment to the security of the Philippines and enduring U.S. interest in promoting stability and prosperity in the Indo-Asia-Pacific region.‎

"Our at-sea operations with the Philippine Navy demonstrate our commitment to the alliance and deter piracy and illegal activities," U.S. Rear Adm. Don Gabrielson said in the statement.

The activities Saturday included coordinating communication and movement between a Philippine frigate and a U.S. combat ship, ‎s well as discussion of boarding and searching vessels, the embassy said.

Write to Ben Otto at ben.otto@wsj.com

Read More

* Philippines' Combative Duterte Gets Opponent He Didn't Want: Islamic State (June 29)

* Jihadists Are Seeking Beachheads in Asia, U.S. Admiral Warns (June 28)

* Islamic State-Linked Militants Storm New Village in Philippines  (June 21)

* Philippines Struggles to Suppress \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Rebels as Foreign Fighters Found (June 1)

* Philippines Declares Martial Law on Southern Island (May 23)

Document WSJO000020170701ed71001gt
