World News: Terror Blast Sparks Close Battle

By Dion Nissenbaum and Noam Raydan 
540 words
11 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A8
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

After President Donald Trump ordered last week's airstrike against an Assad regime airfield, dozens of U.S. special operations forces in southern Syria left their small base to avoid possible retaliatory action, according to American-backed Syrian fighters and U.S. officials.

Then came the attack, but not from President Bashar al-Assad's military.

On Saturday, Islamic State extremists disguised as U.S.-backed rebels detonated a massive car bomb at the base entrance, a blast that allowed some of the militants to fight their way inside, Syrian fighters and American officials said on Monday.

Islamic State fighters wore uniforms similar to those used by the U.S.-backed rebels. Some had U.S.-made M-16s and vehicles they had seized from American-backed rebels in a previous battle.

As the fight intensified, U.S. special operations forces and their Syrian rebel partners who had taken up positions in a desert no-man's-land rushed back to the base to help repel the attack, which lasted for about three hours. Pilots with the U.S.-led military coalition battling Islamic State carried out airstrike after airstrike to repel the fighters.

While no Americans were killed or injured, the attack was a sign of the increasing risks U.S. forces face as the Trump administration sends more troops into Syria to help with the intensifying campaign to push Islamic State out of Raqqa, the extremist group's de facto capital.

"It was a serious fight," one U.S. military official said Monday as new details emerged about the rare close-quarters fight between Americans and Islamic State extremists. "It was a coordinated, complex attack. Whether or not it was a one-off, we will have to see."

The U.S. military trains Syrian rebels at al-Tanf, a small base close to the Jordanian border. U.S. forces have been beefing up their presence in southern Syria as part of the broader campaign against Islamic State, U.S. officials said.

Last week, after the U.S. cruise-missile strike on an Assad regime airfield believed to be home to Syrian pilots who carried out a suspected chemical weapons attack, U.S. forces pulled out of al-Tanf as they watched for a possible retaliatory strike by Syria or Russia, which works side by side with Mr. Assad's forces.

"Around 20 ISIS fighters attacked the base, and suicide bombers blew up the main gate, and clashes took place inside the base," said Tlass al-Salama, commander of the Osoud al Sharqiya Army, part of the U.S.-backed moderate rebel alliance.

As the attack intensified, U.S. forces had to fight their way back to the base.

"It was a close-in fight," said the U.S. official.

Members of Mr. Salama's force rushed to provide reinforcements, but came under attack as they tried to reach the base, he said. Two of his fighters were killed.

"We dispatched around six or seven vehicles but [ISIS] attacked us," Mr. Salama said. "They targeted the first vehicle in the convoy."

---

Maria Abi-Habib contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170411ed4b0001p
