World News: World Watch

765 words
1 March 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A4
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

SYRIA

Russia, China Veto

Sanctions Resolution

Russia and China vetoed a Western-backed U.N. resolution that would have imposed sanctions on 21 Syrian individuals, organizations and companies allegedly involved in chemical weapons attacks in the war-ravaged country.

The defeated Security Council resolution would also have banned all countries from supplying Syria's government with helicopters, which investigators have determined were used in chemical attacks.

In Tuesday's vote, the resolution got the minimum nine "yes" votes. In addition to China and Russia, Bolivia voted "no." Three countries abstained -- Egypt, Ethiopia and Kazakhstan.

The vetoed resolution followed a joint investigation by the United Nations and the international chemical weapons watchdog that determined the Syrian government was behind at least three attacks involving chlorine gas and the Islamic State extremist group was responsible for at least one involving mustard gas.

-- Associated Press

---

AUSTRALIA

Arrest Made in Alleged

Bid to Help ISIS

Australia arrested a man it says offered to help Islamic State develop a long-range guided missile and a detection system for incoming bombs.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said Tuesday the man was arrested in the rural town of Young, northwest of the capital Canberra, after an 18-month investigation, and that the operation wasn't related to any planned attack in Australia.

The man is an Australian-born citizen, according to Andrew Colvin, commissioner of the Australian Federal Police. Identified in local press reports as Haisem Zahab, he appeared in court Tuesday where he was charged with two foreign-incursion offenses that carry a maximum penalty of life in prison.

The man wasn't available for comment and it is unclear whether he has a lawyer.

Australia has stepped up security in recent years, giving police and intelligence agencies more power against homegrown militants. It has also sent troops and warplanes to combat Islamic State as part of the U.S.-led coalition, as well as supporting the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

The country's five-tier terrorism-threat system has been set at "probable," the third-highest level, since September 2014. That December, a gunman, later identified as Iranian immigrant Man Haron Monisj, took hostages in a Sydney cafe and held them for 16 hours before being killed by police. The cafe's manager and a female customer also died. Since then there have been four attacks and 12 others have been disrupted, most recently in December -- an Islamic State-inspired plot to set off bombs in central Melbourne. More than 50 people have been arrested on terrorism offenses.

Mr. Colvin said the man charged is an electrician who helped an overseas network of Islamic State contacts by researching and designing a laser device "to warn against incoming munitions used by coalition forces in Syrian and Iraq" and "researching, designing and modeling systems to assist (ISIS's) efforts to develop their own long-range missile capabilities."

While "technically trained," Mr. Colvin said, the man has no military background or previous weapon-design experience. He has also never traveled to Syria or Iraq, but made contact with Islamic State over the internet from his home.

He will reappear in a Sydney court next week.

-- Rob Taylor

---

JAPAN

Retail Sales Rise

For Third Month

Retail sales rose for a third straight month in January, a possible sign that long-stagnant private consumption may finally be regaining some strength.

Sales increased 1.0% from a year before, according to data released Tuesday by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. On month, retail sales increased 0.5%. Sales at large retailers fell 1.1% year over year, after adjustment for the change in the number of stores.

Household spending has been stagnant in the past few years as wage growth remained sluggish despite record corporate profits.

Japanese companies have been wary of offering permanent wage increases, citing tough competition overseas and uncertainties over the global outlook and, more recently, U.S. economic policy under President Donald Trump.

-- Mitsuru Obe

---

AUSTRALIA

Current-Account

Deficit Narrows

Australia's current-account deficit narrowed sharply to a seasonally adjusted A$3.85 billion in the fourth quarter of 2016 from the prior quarter, the Australia Bureau of Statistics said Tuesday.

Economists had expected a current-account deficit of A$4.0 billion in the quarter. The third-quarter deficit was A$10.2 billion.

Surging commodity prices have helped Australia to post record trade surpluses in recent months, amid expectations that prices of iron ore and coal will remain elevated for a while yet.

-- James Glynn

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170301ed310001i
