World
U.S. Strikes Against Syria Heighten Iraq's Difficulty; Prime minister relying on American might in fight against Islamic State for Mosul, even as he maintains deep ties with Iran, a chief backer of the Syrian regime

By Tamer El-Ghobashy 
1,322 words
9 April 2017
00:51
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ERBIL, Iraq—.S. military strikes in Syria are pushing Iraq's pro-American prime minister into an awkward balancing act between two crucial allies helping Baghdad drive Islamic State from its last significant stronghold in his country.

Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi is relying on American air power and ground troops to support Iraqi security forces in a bloody fight with Islamic State for Mosul, Iraq's second-biggest city. Iraq also maintains deep ties with Iran, a chief backer of the Syrian regime and funder of many of the Iraqi Shiite militias that have proved instrumental in turning the tide against the extremist group. Now, some of these same militias are signaling future U.S. strikes against the Assad regime won't be tolerated, and will possibly lead to retaliation.

In response, the Iraqi prime minister has steered toward nonconfrontational middle ground. In a phone call with Vice President Mike Pence, Mr. Abadi appealed for an urgent resumption of international efforts to forge a political solution to Syria's civil war, according to a statement from Mr. Abadi's office released on Saturday. In the conversation with Mr. Pence, the Iraqi prime minister also called for a credible investigation into who was responsible for the deadly chemical attack in Idlib that killed at least 85 people and triggered Thursday's U.S. strike on a Syrian air base.

Mr. Pence's office confirmed Saturday that the call had taken place, but offered a different description of what had been said in it.

Mr. Abadi had told Mr. Pence that the chemical weapons attack was "a major escalation to the conflict in Syria, and agreed that those responsible needed to be held accountable," Mr. Pence's office said. The Iraqi prime minister also "expressed solidarity with the innocent victims in Syria, and reflected on the horrible chemical weapons attacks the former Baathist regime perpetrated against the Iraqi people."

Mr. Pence's office said the vice president had commended Iraqi Security Forces for their progress in western Mosul and thanked Prime Minister Abadi "for the sacrifices of the Iraqi people in our shared fight against ISIS, " and that both leaders also "reaffirmed their commitment to the long-term partnership between the U.S. and Iraq."

The White House also said Saturday that President Donald Trump had spoken a day earlier with King Salman bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia and that the king "reaffirmed strong Saudi support for the U.S.' military strike."

On Friday, Mr. Abadi foreign ministry staked out ground even closer to the Syrian regime. It said Iraq considered the U.S. strikes "a grave escalation." The ministry also indicated it didn't support the Trump administration's assertion that Syrian President Bashar al-Assad had launched the chemical attack.

Mr. Assad has denied launching a chemical attack and Russia has said the deadly agent was released when Syrian jets bombed an alleged rebel chemical warehouse near the town of Khan Sheikhoun. There has been no evidence that Syrian rebels fighting the Assad regime possess the capability to produce chemical weapons.

And on Saturday, jet fighters bombed the same town, killing one woman, according to the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, a monitoring group in Britain. Late Friday, the group said Syrian jets had resumed taking off from the same airfield the U.S. struck.

Mr. Abadi's awkward balancing act is a matter of survival for his government. There are 5,000 U.S. troops fighting in Iraq to roll back the gains of Islamic State, which once controlled about one third of the country. Mr. Adabi has also coordinated with the Assad regime to strike Islamic State targets inside Syria.

So far the Iraqi prime minister has managed to avoid major conflicts between the U.S. and Iran, mainly by maintaining a buffer between American troops and the Shiite militias. Despite their eagerness for a bigger role in the Mosul offensive, Shiite militias have agreed to stay out of the Sunni-majority city as part of efforts to tamp down sectarian tensions.

Still, two of the largest and most powerful Iran-backed Iraqi militias—oth of which have a presence in Syria and have fought U.S. forces after the 2003 invasion—ondemned the U.S. strike as an unlawful attack on Syria's sovereignty. They suggested they would support military action against U.S. interests if a bombing campaign against the Assad regime escalates.

"We will respond to such an escalation in the time and place that we choose," said Abu Taleb al-Saaedi, a senior member of one of the militias, Kataeb Hezbollah.

Naeem al-Aboudi, the spokesman for another militia, Asaeb Ahl al-Haq, said the strikes were a political ploy by Mr. Trump to shore up his sagging support in the U.S. He said the strikes were the clearest signal yet of a budding alliance between the U.S., Israel and the Gulf monarchies—ll of which oppose Iran.

Iran itself has refrained from issuing any threats after the U.S. airstrikes in Syria. While Iranian leaders including President Hassan Rouhani and Foreign Minister Javad Zarif have condemned the strikes, Tehran's response hasn't moved beyond rhetoric. Both Iran and Russia, despite their deep involvement in the Syrian conflict, are wary of escalating hostilities with the U.S.

One factor in Iran's decision-making is its nuclear deal, an accord reached in 2015 with six world powers including the U.S. The deal freed Iran from sanctions that had constrained its economy for years in exchange for new restrictions on its nuclear program.

Some Iraqi Shiite groups, also sympathetic to the Assad regime, are also concerned that the U.S. missile strikes could cause blowback in Iraq.

"This is worrying because anything that happens in Syria, has an equivalent impact in Iraq," said Moeen al-Kadhemi, a senior official for the Badr Organization, one of the largest Iran-backed paramilitary groups in Iraq and counts Iraq's interior minister among its top leadership.

Mr. Abadi is mindful of the potential political impact. The U.S. strikes in Syria, if they continue, could provoke Iran to throw its support behind pro-militia figures in local elections scheduled for September.

Following the American strikes in Syria, Nouri al-Maliki, Mr. Abadi's predecessor and one of Iraq's three largely ceremonial vice presidents who is seen as a potential future challenger for the prime minister's seat, issued a blistering critique that appeared to take a swipe at his successor.

"The use of force against terrorists could be justified, but against nations, it is considered risky," Mr. Maliki said. The U.S., the former Iraqi prime minister added, uses force to impose its will on "frightened" leaders in the region.

Also, in a break with traditional Shiite orthodoxy in Iraq, cleric Moqtada al-Sadr, long an opponent of the U.S. involvement in the region who still holds sway over a significant constituency in Iraq, on Saturday called on Mr. Assad to step down while warning Mr. Trump that further military strikes against the Assad regime would become a Vietnam-like quagmire.

Asa Fitch, Ghassan Adnan, Ali A. Nabhan and Louise Radnofsky contributed to this article.

Write to Tamer El-Ghobashy at tamer.el-ghobashy@wsj.com

Related Coverage

* U.S. Military Strategy Altered in Syria

* Trump's Syria Strike Fuels Russia Tensions

* Capital Journal: Strike Sends Russia a Signal

* Trump, Jolted by Images, Forged Decision to Launch Airstrikes in Syria

* Analysis: U.S. Strike Probably Won't Endanger Assad Rule

* Strike Raises Tensions With Iran

* Haley Warns U.S. Prepared to ‘o More' in Syria

Document WSJO000020170408ed48001e1
