Lens
Multimedia
In the Marshlands, ‘nother Face of Iraq’

By JOHN OTIS 
610 words
29 June 2017
10:00
NYT Blogs
NYTB
English
©017 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved 

After 18 months covering the battle against Islamic State fighters in northern Iraq, Emilienne Malfatto felt compelled to show a less-violent side of the war-torn nation. And she found one in Chibayish, a small district in the Mesopotamian marshes.

“hen you say ‘raq,’eople just think war: the two wars in Baghdad or bombings,”s. Malfatto said. “ut you also have this beautiful place with beautiful people. It’ like another face of Iraq.”

The marshlands, comprising a nearly 8,000-square-mile area, are at the junction of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Their denizens, the Ma’an —lso known as the Marsh Arabs —ive free from threats posed elsewhere by ISIS and militias.

She had first journeyed to Chibayish in late 2016, going alone to develop rapport and trust with members of the community. She benefited both from her command of the language and by being female. Women were quick to embrace and engage her, Ms. Malfatto said, explaining that a male stranger would not elicit that same quick trust or openness.

“eople were really willing to open up,”aid Ms. Malfatto, who extolled the Ma’an’ remarkable hospitality. She forged strong bonds with several families who offered shelter in their reed houses, provided food and arranged boat rides into the marshes, which she described as having a mythical quality. She also made sure to be respectful of their conservative customs.

“ am absolutely not a religious person, and I am quite fascinated by faith as an object of study,”he said. In particular, she was struck by the levity that accompanied daily prayer, and by the way such worship was integrated into everyday moments. She hopes her portrayal of Muslims will be a counterbalance to the current stigmatization of Islam in political debate and the media.

The families gave Ms. Malfatto intimate access to everyday life in the marshes, including a family eating a breakfast of fresh buffalo milk, sugary tea and homemade bread; boat drivers piloting along murky waters; and portraits of Ma’an women with well-worn faces and hands.

The last few decades have brought changes to the Iraqi marshlands. Once, they had been a tourist destination, home to a variety of wildlife. But in the 1990s, Saddam Hussein drained the marshlands in an attempt to flush out Shiite rebels who had fled there after the Persian Gulf war of 1991.

After U.S. forces toppled Hussein’ regime in 2003, the Ma’an returned to the marshes, destroying the dams and dikes that had been constructed. Water again flowed through the area, once more allowing vegetation and livestock to thrive.

However, threats to the marshlands remain, a result of climate change and dam construction on the rivers. Rising temperatures have led to large amounts of water evaporation. Construction of newer dams upriver in Turkey, where the headwaters of the Tigris and the Euphrates are located, has also reduced the rivers’low.

Twice in the last 10 years —n 2008 and in 2015 —hose conditions led to the marshes nearly vanishing. It’ likely they will dry up yet again, perhaps this time for good. And though Iraq is still grappling with ISIS and war recovery, Ms. Malfatto hopes that the threat to the Ma’an and their livelihood will not go ignored.

“raq has other problems,”he said. “aybe they think they have more important stuff to deal with. On the other hand, they cannot let this part of the country die.”

Follow @emalfatto and @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

Document NYTB000020170629ed6t00001
