World
The 10-Point. A personal, guided tour to the best scoops and stories every day in The Wall Street Journal, from Editor in Chief Gerard Baker.

By Gerard Baker 
1,111 words
29 August 2017
12:58
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning,

Asian Provocateur

Tensions in East Asia are rising sharply again after North Korea launched a ballistic missile over northern Japan, the latest in a string of direct provocations that have destabilized the region and triggered global alarm. While the missile was in the air early Tuesday morning local time, Japanese authorities sent an alert to areas near its path, advising people to "take refuge in a sturdy building or underground." The missile passed over the island of Hokkaido and landed in the Pacific Ocean about 14 minutes after launch, causing no damage. The action prompted a fiery response from Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who said it posed a "grave and serious threat" and called for an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council. Mr. Abe said that he spoke by phone with President Trump for 40 minutes and that the president gave a "strong commitment" to Japan's security. Global stocks fell while investors bought haven assets such as gold and government bonds, as the launch revived geopolitical fears in the markets.

A Hard Rain

After pummeling Texas for days, Tropical Storm Harvey slid offshore but it is on track to make another landfall east of Houston late Tuesday or Wednesday, lashing the state and neighboring Louisiana with torrential rain. Historic flooding has paralyzed the region, inundating homes and businesses while the city struggles to perform basic functions. Officials were forced to make the difficult decision to release water from reservoirs, adding to the flooding but heading off potentially worse damage. The city's health-care system is facing unprecedented strains as several hospitals in the area have been evacuated. Most of Houston's major employers, including its schools, airports and port, are shut and trucking fleets, railroads and shipping lines are rerouting cargo and setting up alternative supply lines. We report that the storm is likely to deal a significant blow to Houston's economy. A disaster economist estimated that $145 billion in property is at risk of being damaged by Harvey. For comparison, the devastation wreaked by Hurricane Katrina is estimated to have cost about $100 billion in property damage in 2005.

Apple Harvest Time

Apple has scheduled a product-announcement event for Sept. 12, reinforcing expectations that the technology giant will release new iPhones and a smartwatch well ahead of the holiday shopping season. We report the company is expected to unveil three iPhones, including a showcase device to mark the product's 10th anniversary. Analysts in recent months reported that production glitches on the newest iPhone could cause it to be delayed. If the announcement proceeds as scheduled, its timing would be roughly consistent with that of iPhone launches in previous years, reassuring investors and customers that the device is on track. Also, the event is set to take place a week after sales of rival Samsung's Galaxy Note 8 begin in the U.S.

Know Thyself

Most of us are not as self-aware as we think we are. Research shows that people who have a high level of self-awareness—ho see themselves, how they fit into the world and how others see them clearly—ake smarter decisions, raise more-mature children and are more successful in school and at work. They are less likely to lie, cheat and steal. And they have healthier relationships. But how can we truly know how others see us? Those who know us best often won't tell us the truth, especially if it is critical. Social media, with all its "likes" and "friends," can give us a false sense of self, too. Our Bonds columnist Elizabeth Bernstein provides tips for gaining awareness, such as picking the right person for feedback and observing people's reactions to you.

Today's Video

Flood Warning

Record flooding in the Houston area related to Tropical Storm Harvey is forcing some residents to evacuate and prompting many thousands of others to call for help. Here is what you need to know.

TOP STORIES

U.S.

Are Trump's August Controversies Careless—r Calculated?

Cities and Schools Walk Free-Speech Tightrope in Wake of Charlottesville

WORLD

China and India Agree to End Border Standoff

Stabbings in Russia Claimed by \b ISIS\b0  Raise Terror Concerns

BUSINESS

New Uber CEO's First Job: Manage the Board

Ding-Dong! Best Buy and Amazon Bring Back the Traveling Salesman

MARKETS

In a Blast From a Financial-Crisis Past, Synthetic CDOs Are Back

Regulators, Auto Lenders Dig Into Customer-Refunds Process

Number of the Day

$11 billion

The approximate amount Gilead Sciences agreed to pay for Kite Pharma, an ambitious bet on a new type of cancer therapy that is on the brink of becoming commercially available in the U.S.

Today's Question

Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on the response to Tropical Storm Harvey? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—ompiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response

Responding to yesterday's question on President Trump pardoning former Sheriff Joe Arpaio, Derick Ball of California said: "The pardon of Sheriff Arpaio was legal and appropriate. This is exactly what presidential pardons are intended for. He is surely no longer a danger to the public; rather a victim of his own principles that put him at odds with the federal government." Beth DeHaven of Colorado wrote: "President Trump's pardon of Sheriff Arpaio so soon after his Charlottesville gaffe and so early in his presidency should come as no surprise. Once again he is 'doubling down' on securing the approval of the base who elected him despite the extremely poor optics to the rest of the country." J.D. Rogers of North Carolina opined: "The pardon is a middle finger to the laws of our land." And Gary Lacher of Tennessee shared: "How do I feel about it? Two words: Hear, hear!"

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.

Sign up here to receive "Brexit Beyond: Europe in Flux," a daily email update on the unfolding Brexit process and its global implications for business and finance.

The 10-Point In Your Inbox

CLICK HERE to sign up for this briefing by email.

Document WSJO000020170829ed8t001b9
