World News -- Middle East Crossroads: Israel's New Neighbor:  ISIS 

By Yaroslav Trofimov 
674 words
28 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A10
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

ELIAD, Golan Heights -- On one side of a fence that snakes through eucalyptus-covered ridges is a swath of Syrian villages held by Islamic State. On the other, Yitzhak Ribak grows his Merlots, Cabernet Sauvignons and Syrahs.

"My grapes are just 10 meters from the border fence. Sometimes I hear the booms on the other side. Sometimes I see people on the other side. They look like shepherds, but who knows," said the Israeli winemaker. "It's crazy."

So far, Islamic State hasn't bothered his vineyard. "I am here all alone on my tractor at night and I am not afraid."

While most attention has focused on Islamic State's shrinking but still vast territory in eastern Syria and northwestern Iraq, the extremist group has also proved resilient in the pocket of land it controls at the confluence of Syria, Jordan and the Israeli-annexed Golan Heights.

Known as the Khalid bin Walid Army, the Islamic State affiliate has rebuffed repeated offensives by the Western-backed Free Syrian Army and other moderate rebels. The porous nature of Syria's front lines and corruption within FSA ranks have allowed Islamic State personnel and weapons to infiltrate the area known as the Yarmouk Basin, said Aymenn Jawad al-Tamimi, a security analyst who follows the group.

The presence of Islamic State so close to Israeli-populated towns and villages along the demarcation line in the Golan Heights poses an obvious threat -- albeit one that so far hasn't materialized into cross-border attacks.

"The Golan is still the quietest place in the whole country," said Yoni Hirsch, chairman of the municipal council of Nov, a community of some 800 people about 2 miles from Islamic State-held areas. But, he said, "we know that in one day with the decision of one person on the other side, our lives can change."

The Israeli government is taking no chances. Over the past three years, it has replaced the old security fence in the Golan Heights, a plateau seized from Syria in the 1967 Middle East war, with a new structure some 20 feet high and equipped with modern sensors. It is also erecting a new fence further south along the border with Jordan.

Islamic State has pledged to eliminate Israel as part of its plan to build a world-wide Islamic caliphate. But it also has priorities and in southern Syria, the militants have focused on fighting more moderate rebels.

Such an unexpectedly peaceful coexistence with Islamic State next door helps explain Israeli perceptions of the Syrian conflict. The U.S. and European allies view Islamic State, which has carried out terrorist attacks in the West, as the principal threat.

Israeli officials, by contrast, are far more alarmed by Iran and the Lebanese Hezbollah militia. Preventing Iranian proxies from getting close to the Golan has emerged as a key Israeli priority in the Syrian conflict.

Islamic State, also known by its Arabic acronym Daesh, "is not powerful enough to make us fear," said Ayoob Kara, the only Arab minister in the Israeli government who says he is in regular contact with Syrian factions.

"Daesh is going to lose," he added. "There is no way it is going to be successful and by the end of the year, we won't see it in any state around here. The problem of the Middle East is the capital of extremism that is Iran."

For Mr. Ribak, who moved to Eliad in 1973 a few months before Syrian tanks attempting to recapture the Golan were stopped outside the village, the growth of Islamic State across the fence carries a clear message. Israel was lucky, he said, that its lengthy attempts at peace talks with Syria, based on trading the Golan Heights for a peace treaty, finally collapsed in 2010.

"If we had given the Golan to Syria then, it would have all become ISIS-land," Mr. Ribak said.