Asia and Australia Edition
Briefing
North Korea, Catalonia, Hurricane Nate: Your Monday Briefing

By CHARLES McDERMID 
1,323 words
8 October 2017
20:53
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Good morning.

Here’ what you need to know:

•orth Korea celebrates a major holiday tomorrow, raising concerns of another possible major nuclear or missile test. The leader, Kim Jong-un, vowed over the weekend to build up his nuclear arsenal as a “owerful deterrent”o the U.S.

At a major meeting, above, Mr. Kim also promoted his sister, Kim Yo-jong, 30, to the nation’ top decision making body, along with Foreign Minister Ri Yong-ho, who warned last month of a possible hydrogen bomb test over the Pacific.

The moves came after days of vague, threatening comments from President Trump: that a dinner with military leaders was “he calm before the storm,” and that 25 years of talks and deals with North Korea had made “ools of U.S. negotiators.”“orry, but only one thing will work!”e tweeted.

_____

•.S. investigators, still unable to identify the gunman’ motive for massacring 58 people on Oct. 1, are putting up billboards around Las Vegas begging, “f you know something, say something.”

Our reporters were able to reconstruct the contours of his life. Stephen Paddock, 64, was a savvy businessman and an utterly unremarkable “umbers guy”ith a special skill at video poker.

His girlfriend, Marilou Danley, told investigators that he seemed to be deteriorating mentally and physically.

_____

•resident Trump and his vice president, Mike Pence, above, reignited the fight with the N.F.L. over kneeling protests.

In Washington, President Trump laced into Bob Corker, an influential Republican senator, in a deeply personal back-and-forth on Twitter over Mr. Corker’ decision to not run for re-election.

In an interview, Mr. Corker warned that the president’ behavior could set the nation “n the path to World War III.”

_____

•atalans rallied in large numbers in support of a united Spanish state, just ahead of an expected declaration of independence.

Carles Puigdemont, the regional president who has led the independence movement, is expected to address the regional Parliament tomorrow.

The pro-independence movement has gained an unlikely symbol: tractors.

_____

•“erminated, effective immediately.”

Harvey Weinstein was fired by the directors of his film company, which include his brother, Robert, days after a Times investigation revealed accusations of sexual harassment that stretch back decades.

But there’ been an eerie silence in Hollywood.

Why did it take so long for the tales to emerge? “oo many people in the intertwined news and entertainment industries had too much to gain from Mr. Weinstein for too long,”our media columnist writes.

_____

•s a young Japanese newscaster fluent in Arabic, she interviewed the Libyan dictator Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi. As Japan’ environment minister, she pushed businesses to let workers wear casual clothes in summer to reduce the need for air-conditioning.

Now the country is watching to see if Yuriko Koike, 65, the first female governor of Tokyo, will run for Parliament this month, which could position her to challenge Prime Minister Shinzo Abe.

She has insisted that she won’ run, but has until tomorrow to make a final declaration. Above, she holds a sign reading “njecting hope into Japan”t a debate Sunday with Mr. Abe.

_____

Business

•n many major countries, including the U.S., Britain and Japan, labor markets are exceedingly tight. But workers are still waiting for fatter paychecks.

•eadlines to watch for: The European Central Bank is expected to publish the results of its latest stress test today, and the annual meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank begin Tuesday in Washington.

•ere’ a snapshot of global markets.

In the News

•urricane Nate weakened to a tropical storm as it moved inland over Mississippi and Alabama, but storm-surge flooding continued in the southeastern U.S. [The New York Times]

•ISIS fighters have been surrendering en masse after losing their last major urban stronghold in Iraq. [The New York Times]

•hina denied responsibility for reported cyberattacks in the U.S. appearing to target Guo Wengui, the exiled tycoon who accused Communist Party officials of corruption. [Reuters]

•he Australia-originated group that won the Nobel Peace Prize for its nuclear-disarmament efforts is getting over its shock and preparing calls for Australia to become the 123rd country to sign the U.N.’ Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. The Nobel Prize in Economics is announced today. [AAP via The New Daily]

•n tough, seasonal industries, U.S. employers trying to “ire American”ften can’ find workers who’l stay on the job. [The Washington Post]

•n Hong Kong, pathologists discovered more than 1,200 adulterants in supposedly natural Chinese medicinal supplements, including drugs and animal tissue. [The New York Times]

•he 30th World Solar Challenge: More than 40 international teams are racing mostly sun-powered vehicles across Australia, traversing the 3,000 kilometers (1,864 miles) from Darwin to Adelaide. [Electrek]

Smarter Living

Tips, both new and old, for a more fulfilling life.

• trip to the sauna may be good for high blood pressure.

• itting the bar tonight? Here are some dos and don’s from bartenders.

•ecipe of the day: The beauty of linguine with lemon sauce is its simplicity.

Noteworthy

•he tree lobster, an extraordinarily rare insect, was declared extinct in 1960. Well, it’ back. Genetic analysis showed that a stick insect found on another island was the same species as the one wiped out by rats on Australia’ Lord Howe Island.

•n memoriam: Tom Alter, 67, an Indian-born character actor of American descent who played Westerners in more than 300 Bollywood films.

•i Weiwei, the dissident Chinese artist now based in Berlin, has been in New York preparing “ood Fences Make Good Neighbors,” project that debuts Thursday with more than 300 public artworks meant to draw attention to the global refugee crisis.

Back Story

This was a big weekend for Kesen, one of the many communities in Japan that were devastated after an earthquake and tsunami struck in March 2011.

Kesen reopened its Buddhist temple on Sunday. A Times photo editor who often chooses the images for our briefings, Hiroko Masuike, was there to capture the moment.

Ms. Masuike has been making twice-yearly visits to document residents’truggles to rebuild their lives since the disaster, which killed almost 16,000 people and caused nuclear plant meltdowns.

In one of the community’ villages, the tsunami killed more than 200 people and reduced most buildings to rubble.

The disaster’ scars are still visible, Ms. Masuike said. Most residents have moved away, and only about 10 buildings have been rebuilt.

But Kesen’ story is also one of resilience, she said. A monk named Nobuo Kobayashi stayed and, by selling land and with the help of donations, rebuilt the 1,100 year-old Buddhist Kongoji Temple on higher ground. Its statues have also been painstakingly restored.

On Sunday, about 300 people gathered for the reopening. Monks from all over Japan chanted sutras for those who perished, Ms. Masuike said. “hey prayed for the temple to stay here forever.”

Patrick Boehler contributed reporting.

_____

Your Morning Briefing is published weekday mornings and updated online. Browse past briefings here.

We have briefings timed for the Australian, Asian, European and American mornings. You can sign up for these and other Times newsletters  here .

If photographs appear out of order, please download the updated New York Times app from iTunes or Google Play.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at asiabriefing@nytimes.com.

KCNA,via Associated Press | Drew Angerer/Getty Images | Michael Conroy/Associated Press | Felipe Trueba/European Pressphoto Agency | Yana Paskova for The New York Times | Pool photo by Ma Ping | Ko Sasaki for The New York Times | Mark Wallheiser/Getty Images | Ilvy Njiokiktjien for The New York Times | Rohan Cleave/Melbourne Zoo, Australia | Hiroko Masuike/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020171008eda8003ml
