World
U.S. Dismisses Russia's Ban on Aircraft Over Syrian Safe Zones; Areas were established without explicit U.S. consent during Russian talks with Turkey, Iran

By Thomas Grove in Moscow and Felicia Schwartz in Washington 
935 words
6 May 2017
02:37
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A Russian envoy said U.S. aircraft are barred from flying over the "de-escalation zones" that Russia, Iran and Turkey recently agreed to establish in Syria, but U.S. officials dismissed the admonition as it continues operations to target Islamic State.

The disagreement left deeply uncertain the status of the zones that were established this week without explicit U.S. consent during talks on Syria in Kazakhstan.

Alexander Lavrentiev, Russian President Vladimir Putin 's envoy for Syria, didn't indicate what role Russian aircraft would have in enforcing the no-fly rule. The ban also applies to aircraft of the U.S.-led international coalition fighting Islamic State militants, said the envoy,

"From this time forward, these zones are closed for their flights…ith or without notification," Mr. Lavrentiev was quoted as saying in the Kazakh capital Astana, where Russia, Iran and Turkey signed a memorandum on Thursday to create at least four safe zones across Syria.

The zones being set up under the agreement are intended to bolster fragile cease-fires and allow for the delivery of humanitarian aid and the return of refugees, officials from the three nations said.

U.S. officials had reacted warily earlier this week to the agreement, saying any deal involving Iran was suspect and noting that past efforts to reduce violence in Syria had failed. After Mr. Lavrentiev's comments Friday, the Trump administration said it didn't plan to change the U.S. posture.

"As we said yesterday, the United States supports any effort that can genuinely de-escalate the violence in Syria, insure unhindered humanitarian access, focus energies on the defeat of ISIS and other terrorists, and create the conditions for a credible political resolution of the conflict," a State Department official said Friday.

"The coalition will continue to strike ISIS targets in Syria," the official said. "The campaign to defeat ISIS will continue at the same relentless pace as it is proceeding now."

Another official in the administration said, "This agreement does not and cannot limit the ability of the United States and our coalition to continue the campaign to defeat ISIS."

Russia, Iran and Turkey support opposing sides in the war, with Moscow and Tehran backing the regime of President Bashar al-Assad and Ankara allied with rebel groups opposed to him. Russian air support for ground operations by government forces and their allies has been crucial in tipping the war in the regime's favor.

Russian Deputy Defense Minister Alexander Fomin said in a televised briefing Friday that the memorandum is to go into effect Saturday and that the Russian air force had suspended operations in the four zones since Monday.

The U.S.-led coalition and Russian warplanes have managed to operate in Syria's crowded airspace, but concerns have persisted about the potential for collisions. The U.S. and Russia have communication channels to avert midair encounters, although Moscow had threatened to close them following U.S. missile strikes against Syrian regime aircraft last month.

Col. Gen. Sergei Rudskoi, chief of the main operational directorate of the Russian General Staff, said the memorandum allows the formation of additional zones, "depending on the development of the situation."

Gen. Rudskoi said Syrian troops in the de-escalation zones would be redeployed to central and eastern Syria to focus on Islamic State targets, where they will be supported by Russian air power. Russia, Iran and Turkey will be responsible for checkpoints leading into the zones as well as administration of additional buffer areas, he added.

U.S. officials plan to hold meetings with Russian and Turkish officials in coming days. Tom Shannon, the acting deputy secretary of state, will meet his Russian counterpart next week in New York to discuss what the State Department said is "a range of bilateral issues."

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov spoke on the phone Friday to discuss "efforts to de-escalate the continuing conflict in Syria," State Department spokeswoman Heather Nauert said. They will also meet next week on the sidelines of an Arctic Council meeting in Alaska.

Opposition monitoring organizations and international human rights organizations blame Russian and Syrian aircraft for the majority of civilian casualties in Syria.

Neither the Syrian government nor the rebels fighting it are signatories to the safe-zone agreement, the details and enforcement of which remain to be worked out. Some members of the rebel delegation attending the talks in Kazakhstan walked out of the signing ceremony to protest the presence of Iranian representatives.

Mr. Putin and U.S. President Donald Trump discussed the de-escalation areas during a phone conversation on Tuesday. Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan discussed them earlier this week during talks in Sochi, Russia, with Mr. Putin.

Mr. Lavrentiev said Moscow would like United Nations Security Council approval of the plan, but added that its blessing isn't necessary.

The safe zones are the latest step in the so-called Astana process, the negotiating effort backed by Moscow, Ankara and Tehran to guarantee a number of local cease-fires across Syria.

The U.N . also is conducting talks aimed at reaching a political settlement of the war, now in its seventh year.

Carol E. Lee in Washington contributed to this article.

Write to Thomas Grove at thomas.grove@wsj.com   and Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com   and Felicia Schwartz at 

Document WSJO000020170505ed55001up
