
World News: World Watch

547 words
14 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

CANADA

Bill Is Introduced

To Regulate Pot

Canada's Liberal government followed through on a 2015 campaign promise by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and introduced legislation aimed at regulating the sale and production of marijuana.

Details still need to be worked out, the government said Thursday, including how cannabis will be taxed and how provinces will regulate the retail network in which the product will be sold.

The main goal, the government said, is to control the production, distribution, sale and possession of marijuana, and keep it out of the hands of criminal organizations. Criminal offenses for illicit production and trafficking will remain in place.

If approved by both chambers of Parliament, it will be legal by mid-2018 in Canada for a person 18 or older to purchase cannabis from licensed producers and possess up to 30 grams (1.1 ounce) of the drug when in public.

The legal framework marks a significant pivot by a large, developed-world economy in dealing with the marijuana trade, and Canada would become the biggest national government to legalize marijuana.

-- Paul Vieira

---

RUSSIA

Government Faulted

In School-Siege Case

Europe's top human-rights court ruled that Russia failed to protect human lives during a botched 2004 attempt to rescue hostages from a school that left more than 330 people dead, including 180 children.

The European Court of Human Rights on Thursday ordered Russia to pay 3 million euros total ($3.2 million) to the families of hundreds of victims.

A few months after President Vladimir Putin started his second presidential term in September 2004, Chechen gunmen demanding independence took more than 1,100 hostages in the Russian town of Beslan and held them through a three-day siege.

In their ruling, the panel of judges said Russian authorities used tank cannons, grenade launchers and flamethrowers to storm the school, contributing to casualties among hostages.

The Russian government also failed to prevent the attack despite having "specific information of a planned terrorist attack in the area, linked to an educational institution," they said.

The Russian Ministry of Justice called the ruling "groundless," and promised to appeal.

-- Valentina Pop

---

GERMANY

Suspected Fighter

For ISIS Detained

An Iraqi man detained during the investigation into the bombing of the bus carrying the Borussia Dortmund soccer team is believed to have fought for Islamic State in Iraq, Germany's top prosecutor said, but added that no evidence has emerged showing the man participated in the attack.

Evidence suggested the 26-year-old man, identified as Abdul Beset A., joined Islamic State in Iraq around 2014 and led a 10-person unit that took part in kidnappings and killings, the prosecutor-general said. Abdul Beset A. moved to Germany in 2016 and continued to stay in contact with members of Islamic State, the prosecutor said.

A spokesman for the prosecutor said an initial clue suggested the man may have been involved in the attack, but subsequent investigation failed to bear that out.

Instead, new evidence emerged as part of the investigation that the man had been involved in Islamic State. Authorities detained the man Wednesday and searched his apartment as they hunted for clues in the bombing of the bus.

-- Anton Troianovski

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170414ed4e00024
