World
Canada Pledges to Remain in  ISIS  Fight Until 2019; Canadian Defense Minister Harjit Sajjan announces two-year extension of 'advise and assist' mission

By Paul Vieira 
491 words
29 June 2017
19:55
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

OTTAWA—anada said Thursday its military would remain in the Middle East to help in the U.S.-led fight Islamic State until the spring of 2019, as it looks to fulfill its pledge to take on a more prominent role in the global fight against terrorism.

Canada's Defense Minister Harjit Sajjan said troops would remain in an "advise and assist" mission until March 31, 2019. There are roughly 850 troops in the Middle East as part of Canadian mission.

Canada's mission is designed to focus on training and assisting Iraqi security forces, and helping regional military authorities to expand their capacity.

The nearly two-year extension comes on the heels of a seminal shift this month in Canadian defense and foreign policy, partly in response to the Trump administration's growing isolationism in global affairs. The renewed commitment was also made at a time when the Iraqi military says it is making significant gains against ISIS in the city of Mosul.

Canada pledged to ramp up defense spending over the next decade by more than 70%, and vowed to take on a greater role in battling global terrorism by deploying troops to the most dangerous parts of the world.

"Our new defence policy has made it very clear that Canada is ready and willing to do its part for the global community. This includes confronting security issues that threaten our shores and those of our allies and partners," Mr. Sajjan, a former lieutenant-colonel in the Canadian forces, said in a statement.

Canada first deployed forces to Iraq in mid-2014 to work alongside allies in the anti-ISIS mission and now has troops in Iraq and Syria. The Liberal government came to power in the fall of 2015 on a promise to end Canada's direct combat role in the fight against Islamic State, and last year withdrew six Canadian fighter jets used in bombings.

Mr. Trudeau has come under fire from some political opponents, who charge he has allowed Canadian troops to engage in a combat role in Iraq despite Liberal promises of a noncombat deployment. Criticism escalated after it was revealed last week that a sniper from the Canadian special forces unit shot and killed an ISIS fighter in Iraq.

Mr. Trudeau said this week Canada is expected at times to defend its partners in the anti-ISIS mission, adding the sharpshooter should be "celebrated" because it reflects a level of excellence in Canadian forces' training and expertise.

Write to Paul Vieira at paul.vieira@wsj.com

Related

* Canada to Shift Away From Combat Role in Fight Against Islamic State (Feb. 8, 2016)

* Canada PM Trudeau Reaffirms Withdrawal From Combat Role Against \b ISIS\b0  (Nov. 16, 2015)

* Iraqi Troops Press Into Mosul's Old City to Dislodge \b ISIS\b0  (June 18)

Document WSJO000020170629ed6t005pm
