The Daily
Podcasts; The Daily
‘he Daily’ It’ All About ‘ope’

By MICHAEL BARBARO 
574 words
12 June 2017
11:47
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device : On iPhone or iPad | On Android via RadioPublic | Via Stitcher

James Comey says he took it as a command. President Trump says he never even said it. We discuss the one word that an obstruction of justice case could turn on.

On today’ episode:

•Adam Liptak, who covers the Supreme Court, unpacks the word “ope”nd what it could mean in an obstruction of justice case.

•he U.S. military has waged cyberattacks on Iran’ nuclear program and North Korea’ missile systems. So why is it struggling to hack into the low-tech computers of the Islamic State? David E. Sanger discusses American cyberattacks on ISIS.

Background reading:

•n explanation of some of the nuances of obstruction of justice cases, including several examples showing that it is possible to obstruct justice by saying, “ hope.”

Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Tweet me at @mikiebarb. And if that isn’ enough, we can even text.

How do I listen?

If you don’ see an audio player on this page or to subscribe to The Daily for free, follow the instructions below.

On your iPhone or iPad:

Open the preloaded app called Podcasts; it has a purple icon. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link, which will take you straight there. (You can also use the magnifying glass icon to search; type “he Daily.”

Once you’e on the series page, you can tap on the episode title to play it, and tap on the “ubscribe”utton to have new episodes sent to your phone free.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

On your Android phone or tablet:

You can listen and subscribe using the free app RadioPublic, which is available worldwide. If you’e reading this from your phone, tap this link to play the latest episode and learn more about the app.

Or if you prefer another podcast player, you can find “he Daily”here. (Here’ the RSS feed.)

From a desktop or laptop:

Click the “lay”utton above to start the show. Make sure to keep that window open on your browser if you’e doing other things, or else the audio will stop. You can always find the latest episode at nytimes.com/thedaily.

On Amazon Echo, Echo Dot or Tap:

Open the Alexa app. From the navigation panel on the left, select “ettings,”hen “lash briefing,”hen “et more flash briefing content.”ook for “he New York Times”nd select “nable skill.”ow you can say, “lexa, what’ my flash briefing?”nd you will hear that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

On Google Home:

You can say, “.K., Google, play New York Times news”o listen to that day’ episode of “he Daily.”

THE DAILY: Theo Balcomb, senior producer; Andy Mills, producer; Sam Dolnick, contributing editor; Peter Sale, sound engineer. NYT AUDIO: Lisa Tobin, executive producer; Samantha Henig, editorial director; Pedro Rosado, studio manager.

* How to Join Our Podcast Club

President Trump’ exact words to James Comey. the former F.B.I. director, are being closely parsed, with special attention to the word “ope.” Hilary Swift for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170612ed6c002bd
