Politics
Trump Seeks $30 Billion More This Year for Military and Fight Against Islamic State; The president's request comes in addition to the $54 billion in new military spending he wants for next fiscal year

By Ted Mann and Jeffrey Sparshott 
554 words
16 March 2017
17:25
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—he White House is seeking $30 billion in added funding this year for the military and its campaign against Islamic State. That comes in addition to the $54 billion in new military spending it wants for next fiscal year.

The Trump administration, in a supplemental budget request to Congress released Thursday, also seeks $3 billion for the Department of Homeland Security, to be used for border security—ncluding $1.4 billion to begin work on the administration's proposed wall along the southern border.

The Trump administration released two separate budget outlines on Thursday: one for the remainder of fiscal 2017 and one for the 2018 fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1.

Under the $30 billion supplemental request for 2017, the military budget would grow by $24.9 billion to address what the administration calls "critical budget shortfalls," including in manpower and munitions. The request also includes $5.1 billion in contingency spending to support operations aimed at defeating Islamic State and assisting the government of Afghanistan in its ongoing campaign against the Taliban.

The administration asks Congress to make $18 billion in cuts from the nondefense discretionary budget this year. That amount fully offsets the proposed increases in homeland security funding, and offsets half of the increase in funding for the military, the White House said.

That approach—iming to balance increases in military spending with requests to cut domestic programs—irrors the approach of the administration's blueprint for the 2018 federal budget, also released Thursday. The Trump administration is asking Congress for a $54 billion increase in spending on defense-related programs, with a corresponding wave of cuts to nonmilitary agencies, including the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and the Department of Health and Human Services.

In its request to Congress, the White House says that the additional Pentagon funding will help develop "a comprehensive, whole-of-Government strategy to stop ISIS from posing a threat to the United States by funding critical efforts to strike ISIS targets, support our partners fighting on the ground, disrupt ISIS's external operations, and cut off its flows of financing."

Included in the increase to the base Pentagon budget is $13.5 billion for procurement of military equipment, including jet fighters, helicopters, missiles and air defense systems. The supplemental request would also provide the remainder of the funding for a DDG-51 destroyer, for which Congress provided only partial funding in 2016, the administration said.

An additional $7.2 billion would go toward plugging gaps in military readiness, including for training, and to support cyberwar and intelligence operations.

The White House is weighing in on the final months of 2017 in part because Congress still hasn't finished appropriations—urrent spending legislation funds the government only through April 28.

Lawmakers passed that short-term measure in December after a protracted fight in the Senate, offering a small preview of battles expected to take place under Mr. Trump.

Write to Ted Mann at ted.mann@wsj.com and Jeffrey Sparshott at jeffrey.sparshott@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170316ed3g006y3
