World News: Rivals Vie for Edge as  ISIS  Falters --- U.S.-backed forces are in a contest with the Syrian and Russian militaries in Deir Ezzour

By Maria Abi-Habib and Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut and Nathan Hodge in Okeirbat, Syria 
611 words
19 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A7
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

In the last Syrian province largely under Islamic State control, U.S.-backed forces are on a collision course with the Syrian and Russian militaries as both sides scramble to strengthen their hands ahead of postwar negotiations.

The contest for territory is playing out in Deir Ezzour, an oil-rich province where Islamic State has fought to protect its revenue streams and preserve what remains of its rapidly shrinking caliphate.

The Syrian government, backed by Russia and Iran, wants Deir Ezzour's resources to repair a shattered economy and replenish its coffers by exporting oil. It could also help Tehran establish a route over land to Beirut to support its Lebanese allies.

The U.S.-backed forces, who are led by Kurds, are also fighting Islamic State but wary of giving ground to the Syrian regime. Kurdish leaders want to use the province's wealth as a bargaining chip that could help them secure greater autonomy in Syria.

"The Kurds are trying to get as many cards in their hands as possible for the time when everyone sits around the table to play the big game. The scorecards that everyone will be looking at when they sit around the table and think, 'Who has the most and can ask for the most?'" said a senior Western diplomat who is based in the Middle East and focused on the Syria conflict.

With these different armed groups closing in on Deir Ezzour, forces backed by the U.S. and Russia are sometimes fighting within a few miles of each other, raising the risk of missteps that could inflame tensions.

On Saturday, Russian military forces attacked a location in Deir Ezzour east of the Euphrates River where they knew troops from the U.S.-led coalition and allied Syrian rebels were operating, the U.S. military said.

The strike injured several members of the U.S.-backed group, known as the Syrian Democratic Forces, according to a statement from the U.S.-led coalition.The statement added that the U.S. would seek talks with its Russian counterparts to avoid future conflicts.

The Russian military provided extensive air support to Syrian government forces during their lightning advance on Deir Ezzour. And this past week, Russia's defense ministry launched a major public-relations offensive to capitalize on those gains by the central government.

Russian military helicopters ferried international news crews to Deir Ezzour on Friday, capturing scenes of life returning to a semblance of normalcy in government-held areas of the provincial capital, also known as Deir Ezzour.

The Russian military also brought reporters to Okeirbat, a town in central Syria that was recaptured from Islamic State militants at the beginning of the month, enabling the government advance.

Over the past two months, the U.S. has pushed for a deconfliction line along the Euphrates River to coordinate the separate battles to retake Islamic State-held territory in Deir Ezzour. Washington has reached agreement with its Russian counterparts on deconfliction in other parts of Syria.

The talks between Washington and Moscow stalled, according to a U.S. official, and earlier this month Damascus and its allies advanced into Deir Ezzour city.

Days later, the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces, backed by the U.S. military, pushed south to box in regime forces, potentially cutting off Damascus and Moscow from advancing farther east, toward the Iraqi border and the province's lucrative oil fields.