Foreign Desk; SECTA
Southern Iraq Struck by  ISIS  As Dozens Die At Checkpoint

By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS 
520 words
15 September 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
8
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

BAGHDAD -- Militants attacked a checkpoint and a nearby restaurant in southern Iraq on Thursday, killing at least 60 people and wounding 83, according to a provincial official.

The Islamic State group, through its Amaq news agency, claimed responsibility for the attack.

The attack, in Nasiriya in Dhi Qar Province, started with militants opening fire at the checkpoint and the restaurant on the main highway that links Baghdad, the capital, with Iraq's southern provinces, said the provincial official, Gov. Yahya al-Nassiri. The gunfire was followed by two suicide bombers, including one driving a car filled with explosives, Governor Nassiri added.

Three police officers were among the dead. Many of the other victims are believed to have been Iranian pilgrims who were on their way to visit religious shrines and were resting inside the restaurant, he said.

Dhi Qar, a predominately Shiite province, is about 200 miles southeast of Baghdad.

The attack took place on the same day that Iraq's Parliament voted to dismiss the Kurdish governor of the ethnically mixed Kirkuk Province, a move that could increase tensions ahead of a planned Kurdish referendum on independence.

Iraq's Kurds plan to hold the vote on Sept. 25 in three governorates that make up their autonomous region as well as disputed areas like Kirkuk that are controlled by Kurdish forces but claimed by Baghdad. Late last month, Kirkuk's provincial council voted to take part in the referendum. Iraq's central government has rejected the polls as unconstitutional and illegal.

Hussein al-Maliki, an Iraqi lawmaker, said Parliament voted to dismiss Gov. Najmiddin Karim of Kirkuk based on consultations with Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi.

Mohammed al-Karboli, another Arab lawmaker, said Mr. Karim ''threatens the country's unity and civil peace in Kirkuk.''

All Kurdish members boycotted Thursday's session, while 187 mainly Arab and Turkmen legislators voted in favor of the dismissal, the two lawmakers said. The governor has the right to appeal the decision, Mr. Karboli added.

Shortly after the session, Mr. Karim rejected the Parliament's decision in a statement, describing it as ''invalid'' and insisting that he would stay in office.

The decision ''doesn't mean anything to Kirkuk and its governor who is still in office,'' the statement said.

Kirkuk, an oil-rich region, is home to a mix of Arabs, Kurds, Turkmen and Christians. Kurdish forces took control of the province and other disputed areas in the summer of 2014, when Islamic State fighters swept across northern and central Iraq and the Iraqi armed forces crumbled.

Iraq's Kurdish region has enjoyed a high degree of autonomy since the United States imposed a no-fly zone over northern Iraq after the Persian Gulf war of 1991. It has its own parliament and armed forces, flies its own flag and has been a close ally of the United States against the Islamic State and other militant groups.

But relations with the central government Baghdad have grown strained in recent years over oil and the disputed areas.

Document NYTF000020170915ed9f0005e
