World
Trump Joins Criticism of Iran; Questions U.S. Role in Libya; U.S. president says Tehran is 'not living up to the spirit' of nuclear deal

By Felicia Schwartz and Rebecca Ballhaus 
567 words
21 April 2017
03:42
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump, adding to strong criticism of the Iran nuclear deal voiced by his administration, said on Thursday that Tehran is "not living up to the spirit of the agreement."

His comments, in a joint press conference with Italy's Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni, added to signals from Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and others that the Trump administration could back away from the landmark deal reached in 2015 between six world powers and Iran.

"We're analyzing it very, very carefully and we'll have something to say about it in the not-too-distant future," Mr. Trump said. "Iran has not lived up to the spirit of the agreement and they have to do that."

The Trump administration certified to Congress earlier this week that Iran is abiding by the accord, but senior officials have said they are reviewing whether to stick with the deal.

Mr. Trump's comments come a day after Mr. Tillerson made a rare public appearance to list U.S. complaints against Iran, complaining about its destabilizing activities in the Middle East, and faulted the agreement for focusing only on the nuclear issue.

Next week, Tom Shannon, the undersecretary of state for political affairs, will attend a meeting in Vienna with Iran and the other world powers who were party to the accord in what will be the first session with Trump administration representation.

Mr. Trump on Thursday also questioned another key U.S. policy position in the Middle East—its role in Libya. The Obama administration had carried out strikes against Islamic State and backed the Government of National Accord, which stemmed from a 2015 U.N.-brokered deal. The internationally recognized Government of National Accord has struggled to assert itself since then.

"I do not see a role in Libya," Mr. Trump said Thursday. "I do see a role in getting rid of ISIS."

It wasn't immediately clear whether Mr. Trump was signaling a shift in the U.S. position on Libya.

On Wednesday, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley called for a "Libyan-led dialogue" backed by the U.N. to resolve continued fighting between warring factions. She called for all parties in Libya to abide by the 2015 U.N.-backed agreement and urged the Government of National Accord, or GNA, to "deliver for the country's people."

While the U.S. and other countries back the GNA, Russia in recent months has thrown its support behind a rival political organization led by Gen. Khalifa Haftar. The move has sparked growing concern at the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

Washington has largely kept its distance from Gen. Haftar, who has had links to the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency and was part of an effort to oust Moammar Gadhafi in the late 1980s.

European countries have lobbied Russia to use its influence with Gen. Haftar, who has received support from Egypt, the United Arab Emirates and Saudi Arabia, to get him to reconcile with the U.N.-backed Government of National Accord.

Write to Felicia Schwartz at Felicia.Schwartz@wsj.com and Rebecca Ballhaus at Rebecca.Ballhaus@wsj.com

Related

* Freed Aid Worker Lands in U.S.

Document WSJO000020170421ed4l0005l
