World; Asia Pacific
Catholic Priest Abducted in the Philippines Appeals to President in a Video

By FELIPE VILLAMOR 
867 words
31 May 2017
12:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Correction Appended

MARAWI, Philippines — Roman Catholic priest seized by militants loyal to the Islamic State has been shown in a video making an appeal to President Rodrigo Duterte to halt a weeklong military offensive that has devastated this southern Philippine city.

The military said on Wednesday that it was analyzing the video, which was released on social media on Tuesday. It shows the priest, the Rev. Teresito Suganob, who was abducted by gunmen last week with some parishioners, appealing for the group’ safety.

The video does not indicate when or where it was recorded, but the background shows what appears to be a war-torn area, and bursts of gunfire can be heard.

Father Suganob and the parishioners were abducted during heavy firefights around Marawi, a city of 200,000 on the island of Mindanao that has been reduced almost to a ghost town.

Violence broke out early last week when troops and  police officers moved into the city to capture Isnilon Hapilon, a leader of the Abu Sayyaf militant group who had been spotted there. But government forces met intense resistance from Abu Sayyaf gunmen and from members of the heavily armed Maute group, which is loyal to the Islamic State.

In the recorded message, Father Suganob said he was among more than 200 people, including women and children, who had been abducted. His assertion about the number of hostages could not be verified.

“r. President, we are in the midst of this war,”ather Suganub said as bursts of gunfire could be heard. “e are asking for your help to please give what they are asking for. To withdraw forces away from Lanao del Sur and Marawi City, and to stop the air attacks, and to stop the cannons.”

The captives “ant to live another day, another month,”e continued. “e want to live another year, two years.”

Standing in front of what appeared to be debris and burned buildings, he said of his captors, “hey do not ask for anything, Mr. President,”dding: “or all we know this is their place. They are ready to die for their religion.”

Brig. Gen. Restituto Padilla, a spokesman for the Philippine military, said military forensics experts had viewed the video and were analyzing its authenticity. But he dismissed it as propaganda.

“t means that they’e fighting for survival, they’e trapped,”eneral Padilla said.

The continuing aerial bombardment of Marawi and intermittent clashes on the city’ streets have trapped civilians and made it difficult for humanitarian assistance to reach them. Rebel snipers positioned themselves at vantage points as troops moved into the city, using armored vehicles as cover.

On a street near the Mindanao State University campus, hastily abandoned shops provided a glimpse of a city in chaos. At least two stores were marked with graffiti reading “ love ISIS,”“elcome ISIS”r simply “ISIS”ith a drawing of a skull and crossbones.

Bananas and melons were left to rot on market stalls, and slippers and other footwear were scattered. A partly burned white dump truck was abandoned in the middle of a road, and many buildings are pockmarked by bullets or destroyed by flames.

Police commandos and troops are guarding portions of the city that are back in their control, and officials say things will return to normal soon.

On Tuesday, troops recovered a huge cache of firearms from fallen rebel positions, including a .50-caliber machine gun capable of hitting targets more than a mile away. The troops also found pistols, rocket-propelled grenades, communications radios, bandoleers of ammunition and two Islamic State flags.

“his .50-caliber machine gun is a game changer,”aj. Rowan Rimas of the Philippine marines said. “his can destroy our tanks.”

Asked if the rebels could win the war in Marawi, Major Rimas said: “o, never. We will go after them.”

Mr. Duterte placed the entire island of Mindanao under military rule after the siege began.

On a separate front, Mr. Duterte issued a pointed attack on Chelsea Clinton on Wednesday after she faulted him for joking about his soldiers raping women.

“ was not joking,”e said. “ was being sarcastic. You listen to the speech.”e then alluded to the affair her father, former President Bill Clinton, had with Monica Lewinsky, asking Ms. Clinton: “ow did you feel? Did you slam your father?

“hat Chelsea, be careful because you live in a glass house,”e added.

Correction: May 31, 2017, Wednesday

This article has been revised to reflect the following correction: An earlier version of this article misstated the name of a university in Marawi. It is Mindanao State University, not Marawi State University.

* Philippine Military Recovers 16 Bodies in City Besieged by \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Militants

* In Indonesia and Philippines, Militants Find a Common Bond: \b ISIS\b0 

* Duterte Faces Test in Battle With \b ISIS\b0 -Linked Militants in the Philippines

* The Latest Unrest in the Southern Philippines, Explained

* Mindanao, a Philippines Island, Is Placed Under Martial Law

Father Teresito Suganob, a Roman Catholic priest who was taken hostage last week, appeared in an undated video. | By ASSOCIATED PRESS 

Document NYTFEED020170531ed5v003bh
