World News: Syrian Military Advances, Ramping Up Pressure on  ISIS 

By Maria Abi-Habib in Beirut and Nour Alakraa in Berlin 
455 words
6 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A6
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

The Syrian army broke a three-year Islamic State siege in the eastern city of Deir Ezzour on Tuesday, handing the extremist group a significant setback in one of its most important remaining strongholds.

The regime's advance adds to the pressure on Islamic State fighters in surrounding Deir Ezzour province, which many of the group's leaders fled to as it came under attack and lost territory across Syria and Iraq over the past year.

The Syrian military has been moving toward the city of Deir Ezzour for weeks. The U.S. and Russia, Syria's main ally, agreed recently on a plan to avoid clashes between the regime and the U.S.-led coalition fighting Islamic State, which is currently battling the extremists in the neighboring province of Raqqa to the north.

As Islamic State is forced into a shrinking patch of territory in Syria, the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and its allies find themselves fighting in increasingly close proximity to U.S.-backed forces.

The advance by Syrian forces was met with fierce resistance by Islamic State, according to activists opposed to both the regime and Islamic State. Syrian military units moved in from the western side of Deir Ezzour province and linked up with another brigade inside one of two government-held enclaves inside the provincial capital, according to Syrian state-run media.

"Army units, which have been advancing from the west side of [Deir Ezzour] province, have met with the garrison of the 137th Regiment this afternoon, breaking the siege imposed on the city for more than three years," said state-controlled Syrian Arab News Agency, or SANA.

Much of Islamic State's leadership, prisoners and most-valued military gear is now believed to be in Mayadeen, about 30 miles southeast of the city of Deir Ezzour. Islamic State still controls Syria's most important oil fields, which are spread throughout the province and which the group uses to fund its operations.

Despite long being at odds with the Assad regime and supporting opposition groups, Washington has opened the door to an expanded role for the Syrian military in fighting Islamic State. "We are here to fight ISIS as a coalition, but if others want to fight ISIS and defeat them, then we absolutely have no problem with that," Col. Ryan Dillon, spokesman for the U.S.-led coalition, said in June. "We as a coalition are not in the land-grab business. We're in the killing ISIS business."

---

Raja Abdulrahim in Beirut contributed to this article.