World
Iran's Chief Diplomat: 'When We Make a Deal, We Stick to It'; Javad Zarif says Iran remains committed to 2015 nuclear agreement with the U.S. and other world powers

By Farnaz Fassihi 
576 words
29 September 2017
00:26
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Iran's top diplomat staunchly defended the Islamic Republic's regional military involvements and weapons programs, while saying it also remains committed to the 2015 nuclear agreement with the U.S. and other world powers.

"When we make a deal, we stick to it," Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif said, speaking Wednesday night before an audience at the Asia Society in New York.

Mr. Zarif offered insight into ways in which the Islamic Republic was hardening its positions in response to Washington, yet also willing to consider potential negotiations on security matters and dual-citizen detainees.

He addressed recent criticism by President Donald Trump, who called the clerical government "a corrupt dictatorship" and denounced the nuclear agreement as "an embarrassment" in a United Nations speech last week, and targeted Iran this week in a new policy restricting travel to the U.S.

"I cannot accept any American president to insult my country," said Mr. Zarif, citing a Persian proverb in addressing U.S. demands on Iran: "Prove your brotherhood first, and then ask for your inheritance."

Experts have said that in general, the Trump administration's hard-line stance is having an effect on Iran.

"Trump is moving the mainstream of the Iranian politics to the right. That will have long term negative consequences for the U.S. and Iran's role in the region," said Ali Vaez, senior Iran analyst for the International Crisis Group, a research organization.

Mr. Zarif, a longtime diplomat, held to a defiant tone on most issues, lecturing moderator Charlie Rose and the audience on the history of America's foreign policy in the Middle East, citing what he presented as contradictions and shortcomings.

"Who prevented Damascus, Baghdad and Erbil from falling to ISIS? Iran did," Mr. Zarif said.

He boasted about Iran's military interventions in the region, which have been conducted through its elite Revolutionary Guard Corps, the Qods Forces and proxy groups like Hezbollah and various Shiite militia in Iraq, and said they had stabilized and saved the region from the wrath of terrorist groups.

"Iranian policy in the region is very clear," said Mr. Zarif, "The Arab world is our business."

But he also indicated that Iranian leaders may be willing to hold discussions about prisoners or even issues related to the nuclear deal.

Asked about Iranian-American and American prisoners held in Iran, Mr. Zarif said he was equally concerned about Iranians in the U.S. charged with evading sanctions against Iran. Iran currently is holding at least four dual American nationals and one American-Chinese scholar from Princeton University. All have been charged with spying.

He reiterated Iran's position that the nuclear deal was a closed matter, saying: "You can't pocket concessions and then ask for more after the deal is done."

But he also suggested that if the U.S. Congress "behaved," Iran would consider additional side agreements. Lawmakers have threatened to impose new sanctions against Iran.

Write to Farnaz Fassihi at farnaz.fassihi@wsj.com

Related

* U.S. Keeps Iran Nuclear Deal in Place but Imposes Other Sanctions (Sept. 14)

* U.S. Treasury Adds 11 New Entities and Individuals to Iran Sanctions List (Sept. 14)

* Trump Administration Again Certifies Iran Is Complying With Nuclear Deal (July 18)

Document WSJO000020170928ed9s006y1
