Social Studies
The Learning Network; Lesson Plans
Then and Now: Exploring Modern Life Amid Relics of the Roman Empire

By TOM MARSHALL and AYAL GOURY 
1,424 words
11 October 2017
14:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Imagine living near the ruins of an ancient culture. Each day offers both delights and challenges, as you witness the ways in which time and modern problems have affected these precious artifacts. What are the costs of protecting these signs of history? And how has daily life changed for people living in such places in the 21st century, at the far end of a timeline reaching back generations?

In this lesson we invite students to learn about one ancient society, the Roman Empire, through stories about the communities that have developed in its wake. From modern Rome to the far reaches of the ancient empire in Syria, France, England and northern Africa, they will seek to understand the role that history can play in everyday lives. Then students can go further, conducting research on a specific site and learning how the goal of historical preservation comes into conflict with modern life.

_________

If You Have Only One Class Period …

Warm Up

Begin by using a map to orient students to the town of Lecce in southern Italy. Give them a quick visual tour using this travel video of the region. Then read the scenario below, detailed in the first lines of the article “Centuries of Italian History Are Unearthed in Quest to Fix Toilet.”

All Luciano Faggiano wanted when he purchased the seemingly unremarkable building at 56 Via Ascanio Grandi was to open a trattoria. The only problem was the toilet.

Sewage kept backing up. So Mr. Faggiano enlisted his two older sons to help him dig a trench and investigate. He predicted the job would take about a week.

If only.

“e found underground corridors and other rooms, so we kept digging,”aid Mr. Faggiano, 60.

Imagine if you were Mr. Faggiano, and you uncovered underground hidden rooms while trying to open a trattoria, a simple Italian restaurant, in Lecce. What would you do?

After students share their ideas with neighbors or the class, read and annotate the entire article.

Focus Questions for Discussion

After reading the story, ask students to work in pairs to answer the focus questions below. Then discuss.

1. Why did so many cultures settle in or pass through Lecce throughout history?

2. Why did local authorities initially close down Mr. Faggiano’ project, and what did they require to allow it to resume?

3. Why couldn’ Mr. Faggiano do whatever he wanted with his land and the treasures he found beneath it?

4. In what ways did history force Mr. Faggiano to change his plans for the property, and what was the impact of those changes for him and the broader community?

5. Do you think Mr. Faggiano handled his unexpected discovery well? Would you have made similar decisions? Why or why not?

_________

Student Inquiry Assignment

If you have more time, invite students to conduct their own research on a historical site from the Roman Empire, investigating the ways in which life has changed in that place.

As a warm up to generate ideas and enthusiasm, teachers may wish to share the slide show “Ancient Rome Today”rom The Guardian, or the New York Times travel video “36 Hours in Rome.”tudents may use stories from the list below as resources, along with this map from Vici.org’ Archaeological Atlas of Antiquity project which depicts specific archaeological sites from the empire.

As students read the stories below and gather additional resources from the internet, the class can use the following guiding questions to help focus their inquiry:

Q: How was this place used or developed in the ancient world?

Q: How has this place been used or developed in modern times?

Q: What are some of the most significant ways in which this place has changed?

Q: What have been some of the most significant challenges or conflicts in preserving these remnants of history?

Italy

Strays Amid Rome Ruins Set Off a Culture Clash Acqueducts’efenders Volunteer to Fill Breach in Upkeep of Park Illegal Dumping in Roman Catacombs Leaves Precious Ancient Site Polluted (The Guardian)

Rome Won’ Be Rebuilt in a Day: The Challenge of City Center Restoration (The Guardian)

Europe

Under English Garden, ‘nparalleled’emains of Roman Villa Roman France In Bulgaria, Roman Grandeur East of Italy

Middle East

When Cultural Heritage Is Caught in the Cross Hairs The Ancient City \b ISIS\b0  Is Destroying, Preserved Online

Northern Africa

Tourists Return to Tunisia, but Slowly Rome’ Glory Is Now Tunisia’ In Qaddafi’ Realm, Shadows of the Caesars

If students need additional background on the Roman Empire, teachers may wish to introduce the topic using resources such as The Roman Empire in the First Century from PBS, National Geographic’ Ancient Rome page, and ideas on teaching about ancient Rome from The Guardian’ Teacher Network.

Share student work on a class map using an online tool like National Geographic’ interactive MapMaker, which allows students to add text links and graphics to a pin on a map of the region.

_________

Going Further

What are the true costs of protecting history? It takes real money to keep ancient structures strong and safe. Nearly 300 people died in a 2016 earthquake in central Italy, and many priceless artifacts were destroyed —n part because property owners couldn’ afford necessary structural upgrades. Learn how this disaster revealed the costs of preserving Italy’ historical architecture. Then organize a class debate to decide what percentage of Italy’ budget should be devoted to structural upgrades, for the sake of safety and historical preservation, versus other priorities.

What have we learned in recent years about Ancient Rome? With all that digging, it’ no wonder that researchers periodically discover new insights into daily life in the Roman Empire, such as:

•rchaeologists have found that malaria may have contributed to the empire’ downfall;

•omans enjoyed eating a fish sauce called garum that may have given them tapeworms;

•hose impressive Roman buildings were constructed just like Legos;

•he city’ bakers once commissioned frescoes to show off their work.

Read one of these stories or find other examples. Then create a presentation that shows how researchers have helped to overturn conventional wisdom or lead us toward a better understanding of life in ancient times.

Can one historical event erase others? Learn how wars in Europe and Asia have destroyed historical sites in this story, “When Cultural Heritage Is Caught in the Cross Hairs.”hen use Unesco’ global list of endangered sites to find another threatened treasure, and design a social media campaign to spread the word.

How do modern Iraqis and Syrians feel about the historical sites that have been destroyed in recent wars? In “Life Among the Ruins,”he writer Kanishk Tharoor explores the personal stories of locals who live near historical relics. Using this and other stories, create a poster that highlights a few of the most powerful narratives from sites in these conflicts.

Does it really matter if historical sites get destroyed? In this travel essay, the writer Patrick Symmes suggests that nothing lasts forever. What’ important, he says, is helping the current inhabitants of ancient places to achieve their own vision of greatness. Do you agree? Write a personal essay in which you make an argument about the value of protecting historical sites, including examples that are close to your own home or heritage. As part of your analysis, consider: What —nd whose —istory should be preserved? For example, in the United States, are the plantation house and the slave market both deserving of preservation? What about the Native American burial ground and the colonial church? And, who should get to decide, especially if preservation funds are limited?

A Zumba party held in a first-century Roman amphitheater in Bulgaria. Related Article | Jodi Hilton for The New York Times | Luciano Faggiano and his sons were digging to fix a pipe in Lecce, Italy. They found a buried world tracing back before Jesus. Related Article | Davide Monteleone for The New York Times | The ancient Temple of Bel in Palmyra, Syria, was almost completely demolished by the Islamic State in August 2015. Related Article | Bryan Denton for The New York Times | Experts said the type of materials used in the buildings —ome more than 100 years old —ontributed to the high level of destruction caused by the 6.2-magnitude quake that struck early Wednesday. | By TURNER COWLES and GAIA PIANIGIANI 

Document NYTFEED020171011edab003s6
