Metropolitan Desk; SECTA
Why Giuliani Was Granted a Meeting With Turkey's President

By BENJAMIN WEISER and PATRICK KINGSLEY 
1,421 words
21 April 2017
The New York Times
NYTF
Late Edition - Final
1
English
Copyright 2017 The New York Times Company.  All Rights Reserved. 

In late February, as the United States and the rest of the world were adjusting to President Trump and Turkey was focused on a push by its president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan , to expand his power, Mr. Erdogan agreed to an unusual meeting with some American visitors.

The guests included Rudolph W. Giuliani , a former New York City mayor who had acted as a surrogate for Mr. Trump during his campaign, and another prominent lawyer, Michael B. Mukasey, who served as attorney general in President George W. Bush's administration.

The purpose of the visit by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey was rather extraordinary: They hoped to reach a diplomatic deal under which Turkey might further aid the United States' interests in the region. In return, the United States might release the two men's client, Reza Zarrab, a Turkish gold trader being held in a Manhattan jail whose case had attracted Mr. Erdogan's interest.

Mr. Mukasey, in court papers made public on Wednesday, characterized the meeting as part of an effort to seek ''a state-to-state resolution of this case,'' and he hinted at some progress, saying, ''Senior officials in both the U.S. government and the Turkish government remain receptive to pursuing the possibility of an agreement.''

Plea bargaining, even for the best-connected of defendants, is normally conducted by defense lawyers and prosecutors, often in courthouse corridors or drab government offices. But the efforts being made on behalf of Mr. Zarrab show the way that political access and diplomatic overtures can also be employed.

Mr. Zarrab, 33, is a well-known figure in Turkey, where he moved as an infant after being born in Iran (he is a citizen of both countries). He is married to a Turkish pop star and is regarded as a member of Mr. Erdogan's circle of friends and associates. Photographs show Mr. Erdogan's wife, Emine, attending at least one charity event alongside Mr. Zarrab and his wife.

Mr. Zarrab had also amassed ''a considerable fortune,'' according to American prosecutors, who say his holdings included ownership in a private airplane and about 20 properties, boats, luxury automobiles and millions of dollars' worth of artwork.

In 2013, Mr. Zarrab was detained by the Turkish authorities in a wide-ranging corruption investigation of businessmen with close ties to Mr. Erdogan, who was then Turkey's prime minister. But Mr. Zarrab used his influence with the Turkish government to win his release from prison, American prosecutors have said.

They raised the issue of what they called Mr. Zarrab's ''corrupt political connections'' last year when they argued that he should not get bail in New York, where he faces charges that include conspiring to violate the United States' sanctions on Iran. He has pleaded not guilty.

Mr. Erdogan, taking a personal interest in the case, said last year that there were ''malicious'' intentions in the prosecution, and he also raised the matter with Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr . during talks at the United Nations, according to Turkish news reports.

''We have to seek justice, for he is our citizen,'' Mr. Erdogan said of Mr. Zarrab in September.

The subject of Mr. Zarrab came up again three weeks ago during a visit to Ankara, Turkey, by Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson . During that visit, Turkey's foreign minister, Mevlut Cavusoglu, accused Preet Bharara, then the United States attorney in Manhattan, whose office first charged Mr. Zarrab, of being a pawn of anti-Turkish forces.

Mr. Bharara, who was fired by President Trump last month, had characterized Mr. Cavusoglu's remarks as ''political propaganda.'' On Thursday, after The New York Times reported on the strategy by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey to turn the case involving Mr. Zarrab into a matter of international diplomacy, Mr. Bharara said on Twitter , ''One just hopes that the rule of law, and its independent enforcement, still matters in the United States and at the Department of Justice.''

The efforts on Mr. Zarrab's behalf come as Mr. Erdogan gains even more power in Turkey, after a hotly disputed referendum that expanded his authoritarian rule and drew a congratulatory phone call from Mr. Trump on Monday.

Mr. Erdogan and Mr. Trump have made overtures to each other that suggest Turkey and the United States could become closer allies.

The new court filing, by Mr. Zarrab's lead lawyer, Benjamin Brafman, includes affidavits from Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey that make it clear they hope to get Mr. Erdogan to accept the notion that a diplomatic deal could be of mutual interest to Turkey and the United States. They wrote in the affidavits that a resolution that would be favorable for Mr. Zarrab could be ''part of some agreement between the United States and Turkey that will promote the national security interests of the United States.''

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey said it was ''hardly surprising'' that senior Turkish and United States officials were receptive to a possible deal, considering that none of the transactions in which Mr. Zarrab is accused of participating ''involved weapons or nuclear technology, or any other contraband,'' and that ''Turkey is situated in a part of the world strategically critical to the United States.''

Some analysts in Turkey have suggested that if Mr. Zarrab were to be freed or returned to that country, Mr. Erdogan might be more inclined to fall in line with American interests in the Middle East.

Sinan Ulgen, a former Turkish diplomat and the chairman of the Center for Economics and Foreign Policy Studies , a liberal-leaning Turkish think tank, said the strategy implied that ''allowing a free pass to Zarrab and company would create good will in Ankara that Washington could use to advance its own regional agenda,'' with clearer support or at least less interference from the Turkish government.

Mr. Erdogan, for example, might be less resistant to American plans to retake Raqqa, Syria -- the capital of the Islamic State, also known as ISIS -- in collaboration with a Syrian Kurdish faction. Turkey regards that faction, known as the P.Y.D., as the Syrian offshoot of a proscribed militant group that operates on Turkish soil.

A swift end to the case against Mr. Zarrab, Mr. Ulgen said, might mean ''Turkey would be much less resistant to the U.S.'s missions in Syria, and primarily its support to the P.Y.D.''

The United States also needs Turkey to continue to allow anti-ISIS bombing missions to fly out of an air base in the southern part of the country.

Analysts supportive of Mr. Erdogan's government contend that Mr. Zarrab's fate is of limited interest to the Turkish state. In the view of these analysts, the charges against him are spurious and were concocted in order to smear the Turkish president.

''This Zarrab issue is not a state issue in Turkey,'' said Hasan Yalcin, strategic research director at Seta, a government-friendly think tank in Ankara. ''It's not an issue that the Turkish state is focusing on; it's just speculation that the Turkish state is related to Zarrab.''

State news media in Turkey reported recently that Istanbul's chief prosecutor had opened an investigation into Mr. Bharara and 16 other United States-linked individuals in what Western diplomats regarded as retaliation for the Zarrab case.

The affidavits by Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey were filed by Mr. Brafman, the defense lawyer, at the request of Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court. Judge Berman initially said the affidavits could be filed under seal and ex parte, meaning the government would also not be able to see them. He subsequently directed that they be filed publicly, Mr. Brafman said.

''The affidavits speak for themselves,'' he said, declining to comment further.

Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Mukasey wrote that both Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Mr. Bharara had been apprised ''in general terms'' before the meetings with Mr. Erdogan and other Turkish officials. They said they had also discussed their roles with, and had been briefed by, a State Department representative in Turkey before seeing Mr. Erdogan.

Copies of Mr. Zarrab's retainer agreements with Mr. Giuliani's and Mr. Mukasey's law firms were also filed with the court but were not unsealed.

Rudolph W. Giuliani has discussed Mr. Zarrab with American and Turkish officials. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEVIN HAGEN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES); Reza Zarrab (A24) 

Document NYTF000020170421ed4l0007d
