Dispatch From Lebanon
World; Middle East
Next Door to War, an Indie Arab Band Sings of Defiance and Joy

By SOMINI SENGUPTA 
1,332 words
16 August 2017
20:05
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

EHDEN, Lebanon —aturday night. The stage is pressed hard against a pine-covered hill. The stars are out. The crowd is shouting “eila.”

I have come to see Mashrou’eila, a Lebanese indie rock band with a loyal boho following, at an outdoor concert in a mountain village north of Beirut. Mashrou’eila sings in Arabic. So I understand none of the lyrics. I do understand something about why its sexy, soulful, defiantly joyful music is a bit like air to its fans.

Tonight, they seem to be inhaling it with all their senses, as though right now, right here, this is what they need, to just be themselves.

a little glimpse of the magic at @Ehdeniyat! Feels good to be back. #balaplastic@greenpeacear@recyclelebanon#dilab#almidan#mercycorpspic.twitter.com/HsJfgUbiK4 —ashrou' leila (@mashrou3leila) August 14, 2017

I am drawn to a pair of young men edging up to the stage, their arms waving like a pair of elegant jellyfish in the purple light.

“e don’ just enjoy the music,”amy Khoury, 22, tells me. “e live the music.”

“hen I listen to their songs,”is companion, Majid Mouawad, 23, adds, “t’ like a feeling of euphoria.”

Any particular song, I ask.

“‘him el Yasmine,’”hey readily offer.

[Video: Shim El Yasmine - Mashrou' Leila Live in San Francisco Watch on YouTube.]

I learn later that it is a song of longing and loss, sung against an aching bass. In the voice of Hamed Sinno, the lead singer, it’ also a song about a man falling in love with another man. Mr. Sinno is the Arab world’ most prominent gay cultural voice.

Smell the jasmine, taste the molasses

And remember to remember me

Brother don’ forget me

My love, my prize.

Mashrou’eila’ five members were born before the end of the civil war in Lebanon in 1990. They grew up amid political assassinations, car bombs, checkpoints. They often say their songs are about what happens in Beirut’ bars —heir latest album, “bn El Leil,”r “on of the Night,”specially is very clubby. But the songs are also about stuff that you don’ readily think of when you think of Beirut bars: class, misogyny, sectarianism, corruption.

[Video: Mashrou' Leila - 04 - Icarus (Official Audio) | مشروع ليلى - ايكاروس Watch on YouTube.]

At the concert last Saturday night, a screen behind the band is filled by a black-and-white illustration of a deserted city block. Bright bits of red fall from the sky. First, they look like rose petals. But as they go on, like a GIF on loop, I wonder: Could they be something else, more sinister, these sharp red shards falling over an empty city?

The song, “bdo,”s about a flower seller who falls in love with a widow who doesn’ love him back. Those are, indeed, just rose petals, the violinist, Haig Papazian tells me later. The street is where Beirut goes to party.

[Video: Mashrou' Leila - ABDO /مشروع ليلى - عبدو Watch on YouTube.]

It is impossible to hear Mashrou’eila’ music without knowing what everyone here knows. That Beirut is still scarred by war. That there’ a war next door in Syria, another in Iraq. That a thumping bass there could be an airstrike. That women are enslaved for sex in some places. That love is forbidden between two men or two women, and that being an Arab, just being an Arab, is to invite fear, revulsion, hatred in many quarters around the world.

How to describe Mashrou’eila’ iconography? To me, Mr. Sinno seems to be channeling Freddie Mercury’ blazing, naughty magic. He starts out on stage with a drapey sequined black cardigan. Layers come off, until a black muscle T-shirt remains, and a black armband to match a rakish mustache.

Mr. Sinno winces when I mention Freddie Mercury. “ think it’ the queer brown musician with a mustache thing,”e says.

Lebanon is the Arab world’ most socially liberal country, though there are parts of the country where Mashrou’eila wouldn’ be welcome. The group wasn’ welcome in Jordan earlier this year either.

“hey represent a kind of freedom in the Middle East,”halia Bejani, a 16-year-old in stylish oversized glasses, tells me. “ don’ like that much the music, but what they convey is really special.”

“t’ rock ‘’oll with an edge,”izar Bouchedid, 52, says. “ou know the songs. But you kind of don’ know.”

Mr. Sinno’ voice has a gravelly quality sometimes. It can howl in the higher octaves, alongside Mr. Papazian’ dirgelike violin.

Some of the bouncy, danceable pieces are like a finger in the eye of chaos, laced with irony.

“il Watan,”r “or the Homeland,”s unequivocally political. It excoriates political leaders for fooling its citizens.

They said ‘top preaching’

’‘ome dance with me a little’

‘hy the long face?’

‘ome dance with me a little’

On screen, a belly dancer entertains.

[Video: Mashrou' Leila - Lil Watan ( Official Music Video ) | مشروع ليلى - للوطن Watch on YouTube.]

“hey’e outspoken,”entures Jehan Bseiso, a poet who is in the audience. “hey defy norms. They’e feminists. Their Arabic —hey use classical and colloquial. I believe it’ subversive.”

At one point in the show, a fan hoists herself on a shoulder and unfurls a rainbow flag. Mr. Sinno accepts it and ties it around his mic stand.

At another point, giant cages of plastic water bottles, all scooped up from the beach along the Mediterranean Sea, spill out and scatter across the stage. The concert is sponsored in part by Greenpeace, to raise awareness about plastic pollution.

Mashrou’eila is known for its cerebral, sometimes impenetrable lyrics. Elias Muhanna, a comparative literature professor at Brown University, writing in The New Yorker last month, cited lines from Sappho and Walt Whitman in the group’ music. Mr. Sinno is the son of an English professor at the American University of Beirut, which is also where the band members met in 2008.

Four of its five members are trained as architects, Mr. Sinno as a graphic designer. Their album art draws from Roman pottery. They talk to one another about the color of their songs. “his feels a bit too purple, throw some green in there, so someone will throw in something really synth-y and high-pitched,”r. Sinno says.

“ink is always sassy.”

For the last song of the night, Mr. Sinno asks those in the audience to hold up their cellphone flashlights. A thousand bursts of light respond to his call. The song is “arikh.”t’ about going to Mars, also an allusion to facing mental illness. He finds this his most difficult song to sing. The lights comfort him.

I find myself thinking of the other torches that a white militia held up the night before at a neo-Nazi  rally in my own country. As I leave the concert, I learn that a man identified by the police as a 20-year-old Nazi sympathizer has driven his car into demonstrators in Charlottesville, Va., protesting the white nationalist rally, killing one person.

On Twitter, my colleague Jenna Wortham posts a photo of a handwritten sign:

"how do you look terror in the face and still muster the courage to love" pic.twitter.com/zMREqKPWzL —enna //\\ Wortham (@jennydeluxe) August 12, 2017

This is a question Mashrou’eila answered. Sexy and defiant.

* For Syrian Actors, a Maddening Road to America

* In One-Woman Show, Arafat Protéé Offers Personal Take on Conflict

* Mocking \b ISIS\b0  in Beirut

* Arabic Music's Modern Voice

* An Image of Tolerance Still Manages to Flicker in Old Movie Theaters

Mashrou’eila during an outdoor concert on Saturday in Ehden, Lebanon. | Somini Sengupta/The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170816ed8g00691
