Politics
Donald Trump's Recent Policy Reversals Reflect Business Influence; Reliance on former and current executives helps lead to a shift away from hard-line positions on China, Ex-Im Bank and NATO

By Eli Stokols and Michael C. Bender 
1,561 words
14 April 2017
02:25
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON—resident Donald Trump's growing reliance on former corporate executives in his White House—nd business leaders outside of it—elped shape this week's reversals on several hard-line positions that defined his campaign, according to officials.

Unlike in the early weeks of his presidency, when his senior staff were a close-knit group of former campaign aides who had helped craft his image as an insurgent in the capital, Mr. Trump has sided recently with the more pragmatic wing of his administration that espouses economic and foreign policies that are much more in line with the Washington establishment's traditional view.

Mr. Trump appears to have taken some of the advice from chief executives he has met with frequently since taking office, as well as from former executives now in the administration and two family members with official White House roles, his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushner.

Take the U.S. Export-Import Bank. During the campaign, Mr. Trump was skeptical of Ex-Im Bank, which funds U.S. trade deals, calling it "unnecessary." The bank has been a target of Republican criticism, which Mr. Trump seized on.

But that view changed earlier this year after he talked to Boeing Co. CEO Dennis Muilenburg, who explained to him what role the bank plays, according to people familiar with the matter. In a recent meeting with lawmakers, Sen. Heidi Heitkamp (D., N.D.) urged Mr. Trump to fill the bank's board vacancies, and the president told Ms. Heitkamp that he agreed with her that the posts—hich require a presidential nomination—hould be filled.

In an interview Wednesday with The Wall Street Journal, Mr. Trump said he would fill the positions, explaining that he now views the bank as important for small businesses, and that other countries had similar banks.

In the interview, Mr. Trump also changed course on whether China was manipulating its currency. During the campaign, he said it was, but on Wednesday he said it had stopped. And in a news conference later on Wednesday, the president said that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is no longer "obsolete," as he had repeatedly claimed last year.

When asked in the interview whether he was lining up with the Washington establishment, Mr. Trump said: "I don't think so," pointing to his decision to withdraw the U.S. from the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement.

"We're getting ready to do certain things as an example on trade—hey will not be establishment," he added.

The change in direction and tone—e is no longer vociferously attacking China and Mexico, and has moderated his posts on Twitter—as come as Mr. Trump has reduced the role of his chief strategist, Steve Bannon, the former executive chairman of Breitbart.com who personifies the economic nationalism that the president ran on. Mr. Bannon has also clashed with Mr. Trump's more moderate aides, including Mr. Kushner.

Speaking about Mr. Bannon's role on Wednesday, Mr. Trump described his chief strategist as a "guy who works for me." He went on to describe a "very good team" in the White House by pointing to Secretary of State Rex Tillerson, a former CEO of Exxon Mobil; Gary Cohn, who was second-in-command at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. before joining the White House as chairman of the National Economic Council; and Wilbur Ross, a billionaire investor.

Mr. Trump, usually surrounded by former top campaign aides and advisers who have followed him into the White House, sat for his interview on Wednesday with only Hope Hicks, his deputy communications director, in the Oval Office. About halfway through the 70-minute interview, Mr. Trump summoned Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, who remained in room for the rest of the meeting.

Several of those aides and advisers have worked to ease tensions with Mexico. Mexican officials have dealt extensively in the past three months with Mr. Kushner and Mr. Cohn, and Mr. Ross has been active in trying to put the relationship back on a more even keel. At a joint Washington press conference on March 10 with Mexican Economy Minister Ildefonso Guajardo to discuss the more narrow issue of negotiations over the sugar market, Mr. Ross made a point of stressing that this is "beginning of a working relationship to help bring progress and development to both our nations."

Multiple U.S. big business groups have also been active lobbying behind the scenes with Trump aides to impress upon them their views on the importance of the Nafta trade pact with Mexico and the U.S.

Another factor in the shift on Mexico has been the mid-February departure from the administration of one of the voices more hostile to Mexico: Michael Flynn, Mr. Trump's first national security adviser. Mr. Flynn had been seen as one of Mr. Trump's aides pushing for a harder line on Mexico. He was an open advocate for the border wall and said during a 2016 radio interview that "radical Islamist countries" were "cutting deals with Mexican drug cartels for some of what they call the ‘anes of entry' in our country." He claimed to have seen Arabic signs in Mexico steering terrorists toward the U.S.

Mr. Trump said in the interview he was keen to get started on renegotiating Nafta. But he added, "We're doing very nicely with Mexico."

Asked whether he would make any changes to his inner circle in the coming months, Mr. Trump said, "I don't intend to." He added that he may change his mind. "From day to day, I don't know."

On Thursday, Sean Spicer, White House press secretary, said that rather than Mr. Trump changing his mind on key issues, circumstances were "evolving toward the president's position." He pointed to NATO, which Mr. Trump has long complained has relied too heavily on the military and financial might of the U.S. "Look at the president's position, where he wanted to see NATO, in particular, evolve," Mr. Spicer said. "It's moving exactly in the direction that he said it was in terms of its goals, of increasing the amount of participation from other member countries."

Mr. Spicer declined to elaborate on Mr. Trump's reversals on the Ex-Im Bank, which many conservatives deride as "corporate cronyism," or the president's refusal to label China a currency manipulator, as he promised during the campaign.

"The president's tough talk was a pledge to get more results for the American people," Mr. Spicer said about Mr. Trump's campaign.

Mr. Trump's shifts have raised new questions about how his base of anti-establishment voters will react. He has no major legislative victories, and his top immigration policy— ban on citizens from six Muslim-majority countries from entering the U.S.—as been blocked by the courts.

Asked last week what was Mr. Trump's biggest success for his anti-establishment base, White House spokeswoman Sarah Sanders pointed to the president's five-year lobbying ban on administration officials.

But this week, the White House waived that ban for Marcus Peacock, a senior administration official who left the Office of Management and Budget to join the Business Roundtable, which lobbies on behalf of major corporations. Bloomberg News first reported Mr. Peacock's waiver on Wednesday.

"We didn't elect Kushner to bring a New York establishment mentality to Washington," said one campaign veteran aligned with Mr. Bannon and his political patrons, the Trump benefactors Robert and Rebekah Mercer. "The reason we worked so hard and gave so much money was because we were promised a nationalist revolution. We didn't send him there to go native once he gets to Washington, D.C."

Pat Caddell, a pollster for former President Jimmy Carter and a friend of Mr. Bannon, said Thursday that if Mr. Trump's core voters get a "perception that he was misleading them, then he will have a real problem, because one day they'll look up and say, ‘ou lied to us, too.'"

He added: "If they reach that conclusion that he misled them and promised them and is just like everyone else after they voted for him, that's deadly."

That angst, however, does not yet appear to be widely shared by the conservative grass roots.

"Few are freaking," Laura Ingraham, a conservative radio host who occasionally advises Mr. Trump, said in an interview Thursday. "It's early. And he's done, and will do, many of the important things his voters want on the economy, trade and border enforcement."

Peter Nicholas, Rebecca Ballhaus and Jacob M. Schlesinger contributed to this article.

Write to Michael C. Bender at Mike.Bender@wsj.com

Read More on Capital Journal

Capital Journal is WSJ.com's home for politics, policy and national security news.

* U.S. Drops ‘other of All Bombs' on \b ISIS\b0  Tunnels in Afghanistan

* Trump Shifts Back to Health Care

* Trump Administration Takes Steps to Stabilize Health-Insurance Market

* In Ex-Im Bank Impasse, Trump Sides With Business Establishment

* U.S. Braces for Next Provocation From North Korea

Document WSJO000020170414ed4e0002t
