World
Britain Raises Terror Alert Level After  ISIS  Claims Deadly Suicide Bombing; Police name attacker who killed 22 after Manchester concert

By Georgi Kantchev, Mike Bird and David Gauthier-Villars 
1,387 words
24 May 2017
01:50
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

The U.K. is raising the terrorism threat level and putting Military personnel at key locations across the country under Operation Temperer. An earlier version of this article incorrectly called it Operation Tempura. Also, Britain's threat level has been at the "severe" level since 2014. It has only been at a "critical" level twice before, in 2006 and 2007. An earlier version of this article incorrectly stated both instances occurred in 2006. Khalid Masood, the perpetrator of an attack targeting Britain's Parliament in March, was 52. An earlier version of this article incorrectly said he was 54. (May 23, 2017)

MANCHESTER, England—he British government raised its terrorism threat level to "critical" on Tuesday, suggesting fears of another attack as police identified the suicide bomber who killed 22 people and injured dozens of others in an attack on concertgoers here.

British police gave the suspect's name as Salman Abedi and said he was 22 years old, but declined to provide other details about him. A U.S. law-enforcement official said Abedi was a British citizen of Libyan descent.

Prime Minister Theresa May said security forces were exploring the possibility that "a wider group of people" were involved in the attack. The higher threat level, she said, means "not only that an attack remains highly likely, but that a further attack may be imminent."

Under the heightened alert level, she said, military personnel would replace police officers guarding key places and big events around the country, in an emergency plan called Operation Temperer. "Members of the armed forces deployed in this way will be under the command of police officers," she said.

Britain's threat level has been at the "severe" level since 2014. It has only been at a "critical" level twice before, in 2006 and 2007.

British counterterror chief Mark Rowley said late Tuesday that police raised the threat level because of concern about several investigative leads related to the attack.

"At this stage it is still not possible to be certain if there was a wider group involved in the attack; 24 hours in we have a number of investigative leads that we are pursuing to manage the ongoing threat," he said.

Security officials and experts said the use of explosives in Monday's attack required a higher level of skills and collaboration than in the recent string of vehicle rampages, whether Abedi manufactured the bomb himself or received it from an accomplice.

Islamic State claimed responsibility for the attack, the deadliest in the U.K. since 2005. British police had no comment on the Islamist extremist group's assertion, and U.S. officials cautioned they hadn't verified any connection between Islamic State and the attack.

Abedi, who grew up in Manchester, lived just miles from the scene of the attack, according to electoral records and neighbors, in a red brick house in a working-class area of south Manchester. Neighbors described him as an aggressive man who didn't mix much with others in the community.

Monday's bombing was a strike on one of the softest of targets: a crowd pouring out after a pop-music performance by a singer especially popular with teenage girls.

As fans of American singer Ariana Grande streamed out of the Manchester Arena, Abedi detonated an explosive device and unleashed carnage, police said, sending survivors fleeing as panicked parents searched for their children amid the chaos.

School officials confirmed the deaths of two young people, an 18-year-old and an 8-year-old. At least 12 children under the age of 16 were seriously injured, authorities said, and others were among the walking wounded. A total of 59 people, adults and children, were hospitalized, some in critical condition, authorities said.

In a televised address, Mrs. May said the attack stood out for its "appalling, sickening cowardice, deliberately targeting innocent, defenseless children and young people" and declared that "terrorists will never win."

U.S. President Donald Trump expressed "absolute solidarity" with the British people. "So many young, beautiful innocent people living and enjoying their lives murdered by evil losers in life," he said.

As police probed Abedi's past and connections, they cordoned off a street in a south Manchester neighborhood and carried out what they called a controlled explosion to enter a home there. They also raided another apartment and arrested a 23-year-old man whom they didn't identify.

"I saw someone face down on the floor, and saw men struggling and cuffing him," said Majid Novin, proprietor of a nearby cafe.

A neighbor said Abedi's family flew a Libyan flag above their house after the fall of Moammar Gadhafi's regime in 2011. Eventually, Abedi's parents returned to the country, according to neighbors, a Libyan counterterrorism official and another person familiar with the family.

While living in Manchester, which is a center of the Libyan diaspora in Britain, Abedi's father would perform the call to prayer at a local mosque, a person at the mosque said.

"We're very sad and devastated at what we've heard. We're just praying for the victims and the innocent people," said a woman in Manchester who identified herself as one of Abedi's relatives. "I heard from his sister that he became religious."

One of Abedi's neighbors, Sandra Locke, said he was an "aggressive man with too much mouth."

"He shouted at us, at my daughter when we wanted to park our cars and he was playing football with his mates on the street," she said.

Libya became a magnet for Islamic State fighters when a U.S.-led coalition began retaking territory captured by the group in Iraq and Syria. The fighters were targeted in Libya by U.S. bombers in January, during the last days of the Obama administration.

In an online statement, Islamic State said the attack was revenge for "aggression toward Muslim countries" and identified the assailant as a "soldier of the caliphate."

As the extremist organization suffers defeats on the battlefield in Syria and Iraq, it has been trying to spur individuals to launch attacks that aren't centrally organized, particularly in Western countries. Its literature has said killing women and children is justified as part of jihad against nonbelievers.

Monday night's terrorist attack was the second in the U.K. this year and the deadliest since suicide bombers attacked the London transport system nearly 12 years ago, killing 52 people. It took place four years to the day after two Islamic extremists hacked a British soldier to death in the capital city.

In March, an attacker authorities said was inspired by Islamist extremism targeted the Parliament, killing five people. The man mowed down pedestrians on a London bridge and fatally stabbed a police officer outside the Parliament before he was shot dead.

Recent terror investigations have focused more heavily on Birmingham and Luton, north of London, which had at one time been home to Khalid Masood, the 52-year-old perpetrator of the March attack. But Manchester has also been in the headlines in recent years.

The northwestern city was long a destination for radical Libyan Islamists during the Ghadafi era, according to records of Libya's intelligence services reviewed by The Wall Street Journal.

At least 25 members of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group—n Islamist guerrilla group that pledged allegiance to al Qaeda—ought political asylum in Britain and settled in Manchester, the files show.

Two of the members of the Islamic State cell that struck Brussels and Paris in 2015 and 2016 were in Manchester months before those attacks, but a spokesman for the Belgian federal prosecutor said the cases were unrelated to Monday's bombing.

In 2014, teenage sisters Zahra and Salma Halane, who attended Manchester's Whalley Range High School—ust a few minutes' walk from Abedi's house—ecame known as the "terror twins" in the U.K. after leaving to Islamic State-controlled territory in Syria.

On Tuesday evening, thousands gathered for a vigil in front of Manchester's imposing gothic town hall. David Walker, the Anglican bishop of Manchester, called on the crowd, some in tears, to "go to build and rebuild this city."

Holly Atkinson said the gathering was needed. "Tonight shows that we in Manchester can come together when it counts," she said. "When you knock us down we stand back up. And tonight we do it for those who can no longer stand up."

Del Quentin Wilber, Benoit Faucon, Hassan Morajea, Max Colchester, Riva Gold and Laurence Fletcher contributed to this article.

Write to Georgi Kantchev at georgi.kantchev@wsj.com, Mike Bird at Mike.Bird@wsj.com and David Gauthier-Villars at David.Gauthier-Villars@wsj.com

Document WSJO000020170523ed5n001jl
