After Islamic State, Is There Still an Iraq?

By Michael Dempsey 
954 words
21 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal
J
A19
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

As the U.S.-led coalition effort to destroy Islamic State's physical caliphate nears its endgame in Iraq, a major question hangs over the country: Is there still an Iraq?

ISIS has suffered a series of crippling blows, including its loss of the strategically important town of Tal Afar in Nineveh province. The U.S.-led coalition will next focus on driving ISIS out of Hawijah, some 200 miles north of Baghdad. Hawijah has an outsize military importance because ISIS has used it as a staging area from which to attack Baghdad with hundreds of improvised explosive devices, including car bombs. When the Hawijah operation is complete, the coalition will focus on attacking ISIS in its remaining enclaves along the border with Syria.

Once ISIS has been deprived of the territory it holds, can Iraq's major communities come together to share power and build a common future? That question is sparking increasingly heated debate in Iraq and the international community. In my opinion (which does not reflect the view of the intelligence community or the U.S. government), the answer will be determined by how the Iraqis respond to five key unresolved issues:

First, the Kurdish independence referendum, originally scheduled for Sept. 25, is threatening to spark a full-blown crisis even before ISIS is defeated on the battlefield. At issue is whether a large chunk of Iraq will eventually break away entirely or redefine its relationship with the central government. Complicating the issue is the inclusion in the vote of disputed territories, including the oil-rich city of Kirkuk, which is held by Kurdish forces but claimed by Baghdad.

On Monday Iraq's Supreme Court ordered the referendum suspended until it can assess the vote's legality. United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres is also calling for a delay, as are Secretary of State Rex Tillerson and the Turkish and Iranian governments. Kurdish leader Masoud Barzani has previously hinted that he might delay the referendum until after national elections next April, but only at the price of concessions and assurances about the Kurds' future status. Whether or not the referendum is held next week, it's likely to be only the opening act in lengthy negotiations between the parties, and resolving the question in a way that doesn't undermine Baghdad's legitimacy and threaten Iraq's neighbors is critically important.

Second, to ensure that ISIS remains marginalized, Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi must accelerate long-delayed political reconciliation efforts, specifically by easing de-Baathification efforts and providing more local power and job opportunities to Sunni communities. This is a difficult task given the deep divisions over this issue within the Iraqi parliament, but Sunni isolation fueled ISIS' rise, and progress must be made on this issue soon.

Third, Baghdad must exercise tight control over the thousands of Shiite militia fighters (many of whom participated in Tal Afar's liberation) and limit their authority in traditional Sunni areas. Mr. Abadi must ensure that the Shiite militias are not allowed to determine unilaterally which populations are allowed to re-enter liberated areas, and that the bulk of reconstruction aid from Baghdad is not distributed only to Shiite communities. The Shiite militias are deeply distrusted by the Sunni populations of Nineveh and Anbar provinces, and they are a potential flashpoint in the delicate Shiite-Sunni relationship.

Fourth, as winter approaches, Baghdad must make progress in improving living conditions throughout the country. ISIS devastated infrastructure in the areas it controlled. The latest U.N. estimate is that some 11 million Iraqis require humanitarian assistance, with more than three million displaced across the country, more than one million living in temporary housing settlements, and more than 200,000 refugees abroad. The critical work of providing food and shelter to displaced Iraqis is a top priority.

The recent claim by Iraq's minister of water resources that the Mosul Dam is no longer in danger is worrisome, especially if it reflects a willingness of the central government to gloss over difficult infrastructure-related challenges. The grouting work performed by an Italian firm to shore up the dam's foundation was widely viewed as only a temporary solution, and most experts still believe there is the potential for a catastrophic dam breach.

Fifth, Mr. Abadi has to begin preparing for local and national elections. Despite a surge in his popularity following the Iraqi military's victories against ISIS, he will likely face a significant re-election challenge from, among others, Hadi al-Amiri, a longstanding ally of Iran. Mr. Abadi has been a strong partner for the U.S. in the counter-ISIS campaign, and his re-election offers the best hope for continuing a positive working relationship between Washington and Baghdad, and for balancing Tehran's growing influence in Iraq.

Other challenges will eventually have to be addressed -- among them closing the government's budget deficit, modernizing the oil infrastructure, and strengthening the banking sector. But the five challenges I've identified are urgent.

After nearly three years of a grueling fight against ISIS and a huge commitment of U.S. blood and treasure, there is finally reason to be optimistic about Iraq's future. But the country is nearing an inflection point, and only with mature and inclusive leadership in Baghdad, sustained U.S. engagement, and support from key allies in the West and the Gulf Cooperation Council will it be possible for Iraq to achieve a future with less violence and suffering and more reconciliation.

---

Mr. Dempsey is national intelligence fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, a fellowship sponsored by the U.S. government.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document J000000020170921ed9l0000m
