What’ Going On in This Picture?
The Learning Network
What’ Going On in This Picture? | Jan. 23, 2017

By THE LEARNING NETWORK 
535 words
23 January 2017
11:30
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated: Jan. 26, 2017

Students

1. After looking closely at the image above (or at the full-size image), think about these three questions:

•hat is going on in this picture?

•hat do you see that makes you say that?

•hat more can you find?

2. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment, although teachers of younger students are welcome to post what their students have to say.)

3. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting another comment. Use the “eply”utton or the @ symbol to address that student directly.

Each Monday, our collaborator, Visual Thinking Strategies, will facilitate a discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time by paraphrasing comments and linking to responses to help students’nderstanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.

4. On Thursday afternoons, we will reveal at the bottom of this post more information about the photo. How does reading the caption and learning its back story help you see the image differently?

_________

More?

•ee all images in this series or a slide show of 40 of our favorite images.

•earn how other teachers use it.

•ead our introductory post.

•ind out about the philosophy, curriculum and professional development opportunities offered by Visual Thinking Strategies.

_________

Updated: Jan. 26, 2017

This week’ image comes from the Jan. 13, 2017 “The Week in Pictures”lide show. The original caption reads:

Iraqi federal police officers demonstrated their skills at a Police Day event in Baghdad on Saturday [Jan. 7].

The Iraqi federal police are currently involved in the battle to retake Iraq’ second largest city, Mosul, from the Islamic State, also known as \b ISIS\b0  or ISIL. The article “Along Mosul’ Front Line, Desperate Civilians and Dug-In Troops and Fighters”escribes this effort. Tyler Hicks writes:

...I recently spent three weeks in this volatile zone, first with the Iraqi Army in eastern Mosul and then, after setbacks for the army, whose block-by-block battle of attrition was not going the way it had hoped, with units of the Iraqi federal police.

The police, traveling in armored vehicles, are playing a significant role in the battle for Mosul, sometimes supporting the army. They are also responsible for holding their own territory around the city.

The police have been tasked with maintaining areas of the front line; nearby, ISIS fighters are ready and in position.

When holding ground and not on an advance, the two sides intermittently exchange rifle and mortar fire, low-level shows of force that tend to harass more than inflict serious casualties.

What’ going on in this picture? Look closely at the image above or view it in a larger size, then tell us what you see by posting a comment. On Thursday afternoon, we will reveal more about the image and its origins at the bottom of this post. | Karim Kadim/Associated Press 

Document NYTFEED020170123ed1n002bd
