World
 ISIS  Violence, Intimidation Escalate in Egypt's Sinai; Women who don't comply with the militants' dress code have been threatened with whipping, acid

By Dahlia Kholaif 
790 words
1 March 2017
20:28
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

Corrections & Amplifications

In his meetings with Gen. Joseph Votel, head of U.S. Central Command, Mr. Sisi said counterterrorism and the protection of minorities were a priority for Cairo. An earlier version of the article incorrectly quoted Mr. Sisi as saying counterterrorism and the protection of minorities were a priority for Washington. (March 1, 2017)

ISMAILIA, Egypt—omen traveling on buses in northern Sinai say Islamic State fighters have boarded the vehicles, introduced themselves as religious police and threatened to whip them and splash them with acid if they don't comply with the militants' dress code.

"They lectured us on how to dress according to Islamic Shariah [law], and warned that those who don't wear full-face veils or travel without a male guardian will face punishment," said Marwa Elfar, a teacher who was traveling from Al Arish to Rafah, near Egypt's border with the Gaza Strip.

Such bus-boarding incidents by Islamic State militants, two of which occurred last week, coincide with a wave of attacks targeting Egypt's Coptic Christian families, spurring an exodus from the volatile northern area of the peninsula.

In the past week, at least 154 Christian families have fled their homes in Al Arish for Ismailia, the closest major city, according to church officials, marking the largest uprooting of Egyptians by violence in recent years.

The escalating violence and intimidation against both Muslims and Christians have again exposed the weakness of the Egyptian army in the region, despite pledges by President Abdel Fattah Al Sisi to restore security.

"Cairo's claimed strategy for countering jihadist violence in north includes protection of the local population, but here we see [Islamic State] fighters successfully targeting the region's most vulnerable population," said Zack Gold, an expert on Sinai at the Atlantic Council.

Such attacks by Egypt's Islamic State affiliate, known as Sinai Province, are designed to project power as the group loses ground in its Syrian and Iraqi strongholds, Mr. Gold added.

The radical group doesn't control any territory in northern Sinai but operates there with virtual impunity. Ms. Elfar said her bus was stopped by the masked men despite passing several Egyptian military checkpoints along the 25-mile journey from Al Arish to Rafah.

A spokesman for Egypt's military declined to comment Wednesday on the flight of Christians from the area and on Ms. Elfar's testimony, referring questions to the government.

Mr. Sisi, a former general, came to power in a 2013 military coup promising to eradicate extremism. His failure to quell the insurgency has led to criticism from Coptic Christians, who comprise some 10% of Egypt's population, and others targeted by Islamic State.

During separate meetings in Cairo last week with Egyptian security officials and Commander Gen. Joseph Votel, head of U.S. Central Command, Mr. Sisi said counterterrorism and the protection of minorities were a priority for Cairo.

But on Wednesday, Amnesty International said the Egyptian leader hadn't done enough to protect Christians in Sinai and elsewhere in Egypt.

While attacks by Islamic State and other militant groups mainly target security forces and soldiers in northern Sinai, insurgents have staged some of their deadliest attacks elsewhere in Egypt.

Sinai Province claimed responsibility for the downing of a Russian passenger jet over Sinai in October 2015 that killed all 224 people aboard. In December, it took responsibility for a suicide bombing at Cairo's main Coptic cathedral compound, which 29 Christians dead.

A Sinai Province video released last month identified the purported bomber in the cathedral attack and promised that more Egyptian Christians would be killed.

The video confirmed a string of sectarian killings by unidentified armed men in Al Arish, which left at least seven Christians dead, including last week's shooting of a Coptic man in front of his family.

Nagwa Fawzy, a Christian restaurant owner, fled Friday with 42 of her Christian relatives after her brother-in-law and nephew were shot and killed by unknown gunmen who then set their home ablaze. Her sister survived the attack, which Sinai Province is suspected of carrying out.

"I wouldn't have left. I have a business and a home there. Al Arish has been my home since 1969," Ms. Fawzy said. But after her family was killed, "staying was impossible."

She is now living in a youth hostel in Ismailia with little more than the clothes on her back, she said. Egypt's government has promised to cover housing and education costs for those who fled. But some say they fear a lack of security rather than money.

"Let's face it, soldiers and police forces in Al Arish, armed and licensed to kill, are scared," said one of Ms. Fawzy's nephews, Sameh, 35. "Why would we not be?"

Tamer El-Ghobashy in Cairo contributed to this article.

Related

* Mosul's East Rebuilds as West Is Engulfed in Battle

Document WSJO000020170301ed310060q
