 ISIS  Seeks To Revive Its Fortunes In Libya

By Hassan Morajea in Tunis, Tunisia, and Benoit Faucon in London 
979 words
18 September 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Europe Edition)
WSJE
A1
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved 

A year after losing its main Libyan stronghold, Islamic State has formed a number of clandestine cells around the chaotic North African country as the militants seek to regroup on Europe's doorstep.

The small cells, some comprised of up to several dozen fighters, have set up new bases outside Libyan towns in the past several months and started making money by hijacking commercial trucks and extorting migrant smuggling rings, according to Libyan and European security officials.

Islamic State has also told fighters to go to Libya from Syria, where a U.S.-led coalition is pushing the terror group from its de facto capital of Raqqa, according to a defector and security officials.

"They consider Libya to be the main entrance to Europe," said Abu Baara al-Ansari, a Syrian who defected from Islamic State in June. Mr. al-Ansari said he worked in Raqqa for Islamic State in the office that tracked visitors to the group's territory. He is now in Turkey, and was interviewed via the Telegram messaging system.

The group's efforts to stage a comeback in Libya after losing control of the city of Sirte last year have sparked particular concern among European officials. Attackers who traveled from Syria to Europe have taken part in a number of attacks in recent years.

A resurgent Islamic State "is definitely becoming a problem in Libya," a European security official said. The terror group can raise revenue in Libya by tapping lucrative rackets and take advantage of weapon stockpiles in a country that is both vast and politically unstable, he said.

Members of Libya's Presidential Council, which presides over the Tripoli government, didn't respond to requests for comment about Islamic State's activities.

Islamic State said two years ago it planned to infiltrate migrant groups and carry out attacks in Europe. Thousands of migrants have crossed the Mediterranean Sea from Libya and arrived in Italy this year.

Salman Abedi, a British citizen of Libyan descent, blew himself up outside a concert in Manchester in May, killing 22 people. Abedi had recently returned from Libya, and European security officials say the type of bomb he used indicates he may have been trained by Islamic State.

Since the death of Col. Moammar Gadhafi in 2011, warring factions have carved Libya into fiefs and fought over its oil fields, leaving the economy in tatters.

"Daesh is exploiting the security vacuum," said an intelligence officer from the city of Misrata who works with forces loyal to Tripoli, using the Arabic acronym for Islamic State.

Militias from Misrata -- who support the United Nations-backed Government of National Accord in the capital, Tripoli -- led the successful campaign to oust Islamic State from Sirte.

There are about 500 Islamic State members active in Libya now, according to an estimate by the U.S. Africa Command, which oversees American military operations on the continent. That is down from about 3,000 fighters when the group held Sirte in 2016.

But other officials said it is difficult to know how many Islamic State fighters are currently in Libya. And they say the group's ability to operate relatively unhindered around the country raises concerns.

Since driving Islamic State out of Sirte, the U.S. has seen "a marked decrease" in the number of foreign fighters traveling to or from the conflict in Libya, according to a U.S. State Department official.

Security officials and the Islamic State defector say the group's fighters -- including Syrians and Iraqis, as well as Libyans -- have been trying to enter Libya in hopes of reaching Europe to launch attacks.

Islamic State members have in the past flown from Turkey to Sudan before going overland to Libya, according to two European security officials. Meanwhile, Libyan forces in the south are monitoring a group of Islamic State recruits who made their way to Sudan from Syria and are trying to cross into Libya, according to a security official from the area.

Sudan is aware some fighters have taken advantage of its porous western border to infiltrate Libya, according to Rabie Abdelaty, who heads the political bureau at Sudan's ruling National Congress Party. He says the government has deployed forces to stem the infiltration.

Libyans were among those who trained at Islamic State's weapons lab in Raqqa, according to another Islamic State defector. Some of the devices were intended both for battlefield use and for carrying out attacks in Europe, said the defector, who was involved in their design and who left the group in 2016. Components are cheap and easy to get, and Islamic State videos show how to assemble them, he added.

In Libya, a rival government operates in the east of the country, where a group allied with Islamic State was ousted earlier this year from the city of Benghazi. In late May, around the time of the ouster, two members of the allied group were dispatched by Islamic State from Benghazi to go to Istanbul, according to a third Islamic State defector who remains in contact with the group in Raqqa.

They were directed to make their way from Istanbul to Athens and to wait for orders about an attack in Europe, the defector said. A European security official said last month the movements of the men were being monitored.

Islamic State fighters who escaped Sirte fled to parts of Libya such as Bani Walid, west of Sirte. The fighters remained hidden in the surrounding valleys for months, but now have started to "set up checkpoints at times and hijack trucks and any goods in them," said the intelligence officer from Misrata.

---

Ben Kesling, Nicholas Bariyo, Nour Malas, Nour Alakraa and Jenny Gross contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document WSJE000020170918ed9i0001f
