World News: U.S. Soldier Killed in Afghan Clash With  ISIS 

By Jessica Donati 
305 words
10 April 2017
The Wall Street Journal (Asia Edition)
AWSJ
A3
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

A U.S. special-forces soldier was killed during a combat operation targeting Islamic State in eastern Afghanistan, the U.S. military said Sunday.

The soldier died of wounds sustained during a joint mission with Afghan forces in the eastern province of Nangarhar. The U.S. military didn't provide any further details on the circumstances of the death.

U.S. and Afghan forces have been engaged in a large-scale operation in the east for several weeks targeting Islamic State and Taliban strongholds there.

The American soldier was the second to die fighting Islamic State in Afghanistan since the U.S. expanded its operations against the group in January last year.

Islamic State began to lay roots in Nangarhar and the surrounding areas as most foreign forces were leaving the country, and has since proved difficult to dislodge despite sustained operations and U.S. airstrikes.

Last year, the extremist group began claiming responsibility for high-profile attacks in the capital, Kabul, including an assault on a hospital last month that killed nearly 40 people.

The U.S. military has escalated its efforts in support of Afghan government forces in recent weeks ahead of the Taliban's expected annual spring offensive announcement, which usually heralds an uptick in violence.

Last year, the Taliban threatened to overrun some half a dozen provinces and were largely held back by U.S. airstrikes and joint U.S. and Afghan special-forces operations. The escalating conflict is claiming record numbers of Afghan civilian and military lives, with no end in sight.

U.S. airstrikes have been particularly intense in recent days, targeting both Islamic State and Taliban strongholds around the country.

---

Ehsanullah Amiri contributed to this article.

License this article from Dow Jones Reprint Service

Document AWSJ000020170409ed4a0001i
