World
Probe: U.S. Strike in Mosul Ignited  ISIS  Munitions, Killing Civilians; Islamic State's tactic of putting explosive material in a structure with civilians was behind the casualties, Pentagon says

By Ben Kesling 
523 words
25 May 2017
21:12
The Wall Street Journal Online
WSJO
English
Copyright 2017 Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 

WASHINGTON— U.S. airstrike on a suspected Islamic State fighting position in March unintentionally killed more than 100 civilians, most of whom died as a result of a secondary blast from munitions packed into a residential area by extremists, a military investigation released Thursday concluded.

The Pentagon said the March 17 airstrike targeted a pair of militant snipers, but triggered a follow-on explosion that collapsed part of a building, killed 101 civilians and left three dozen missing, according to results of the military investigation.

Local Iraqi officials and residents lodged immediate complaints about the strike, and the Pentagon began a formal investigation.

"The investigation determined that ISIS emplaced a large amount of explosive material in a structure containing a significant number of civilians and then attacked Iraqi forces from the structure," said a statement from the U.S.-led coalition taking part in the Mosul campaign.

Residents of Mosul have long complained of new Islamic State tactics of herding civilians into buildings then, using rooftops of those buildings as fighting positions against Iraqi security forces, inviting airstrikes that would lead to extensive civilian casualties.

Islamic State also has parked car bombs near such buildings in hopes any airstrikes would detonate them, creating a devastating blast certain to kill civilians that could be blamed on the U.S., residents of the city have said in interviews.

Pentagon officials have confirmed that Islamic State has made use of the tactic. Iraqi officials have said as many as 200 people might have been killed in the blast.

"Neither coalition nor Iraqi forces knew that civilians were sheltered within the structure," a U.S. statement said. "The coalition selected a single GBU-38 precision-guided munition as the most appropriate and proportionate means of engagement to neutralize the threat and to minimize collateral damage."

A GBU-38 is a precision-guided 500-pound bomb able to hit "pinpoint" targets.

The coalition didn't say what kind of explosive caused the major damage that led the building to collapse, but said residue from the blast included an explosive known as PETN as well as nitroglycerin, substances that are consistent with explosives commonly used by Islamic State but not contained in a GBU-38.

"This ISIS-emplaced explosive material conservatively contained more than four times the net explosive weight of the GBU-38," the investigation said.

Coalition investigators said the bomb was dropped in accordance with laws of armed conflict and U.S. rules of engagement.

"The Coalition takes every feasible measure to protect civilians from harm," said Maj. Gen. Joe Martin, the commander of the coalition's land forces. "The best way to protect civilians is to defeat ISIS."

Write to Ben Kesling at benjamin.kesling@wsj.com

Related

* U.S. Fight Against Islamic State Is Accelerating, Mattis Says

* Iraq Launches Fresh Push on Islamic State in Mosul

* Islamic State Attack in Iraqi City of Tikrit Kills 35, Highlighting Security Challenge

Document WSJO000020170525ed5p0063j
