New York Today
N.Y. / Region
New York Today: Memorializing, After Memorial Day

By ALEXANDRA S. LEVINE 
1,350 words
30 May 2017
12:00
NYTimes.com Feed
NYTFEED
English
Copyright 2017. The New York Times Company. All Rights Reserved. 

Updated, 11:14 a.m.

Good morning on this cloud-cluttered Tuesday.

Welcome back.

With Memorial Day in our rearview mirror, we wonder: What was it like explaining the meaning of the holiday to the young ones in your lives?

While speaking to children about loss, tragedy and commemoration might not be top-of-mind as we gear up for summer, it’ the focus of a recently opened exhibition at the National September 11 Memorial & Museum.

“ow do you explain what happened to a 6-year-old?”aid Megan Jones, the museum’ director of education programs. She helped create activities that use art to teach children ages 3 to 18 about the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks (and, more recently, other tragedies including the Manchester bombing).

“ven those that are 18 now were 3 then, so they really don’ have a memory of it,”he said of the attacks in the United States. “o we spend as much time explaining what the world used to be like before 9/11 as we do on what happened on 9/11.”

The educational program is built around the Cover Stories exhibition, which opened on May 19. It traces the evolution of the Twin Towers on covers of The New Yorker, from almost 50 years ago to the present.

When we explored the exhibition, we saw how illustrations that began as whimsical, lighthearted and fairy tale-like became somber, chilling and politically charged —et still, somehow, poignant and beautiful —fter the tragedy.

As museum guides talk students through the 33 covers, they ask questions: What do you notice? What do you think this is?

For younger children, the lessons focus on firefighters, emergency medical workers, and themes like courage and helping others, Ms. Jones explained.

And for teenagers, the discussions explore the repercussions of the attacks: how Sept. 11 shaped the climate they live in today, one in which the Transportation Security Administration, the Homeland Security Department and metal detectors are the norm.

“e’e trying to help them understand where they fit into this narrative, so we look at current events today and work backward,”s. Jones said. “o we say, ‘ow did 9/11 affect this world that we’e living in?’e’l look at ISIS using social media in recruiting, and at the balance between civil liberties and national security.”

Another new children’ activity, the Art Cart, will open on the outdoor plaza above the museum on June 19. The bright blue stand will be geared toward 6- to 12-year-olds (and their families), with free crafts and science projects that can introduce children to the events of Sept. 11 and bring to life the names of victims they see on the memorial’ parapets.

“hether they’e 18 years old and we’e talking about civil liberties and national security, or we’e talking about heroism and courage from first responders giving back with small children, the idea is to help them see that this isn’ an isolated moment in time,”s. Jones said, “nd to try to help them understand how they fit into it.”

She added, “his history is yours now.”

Here’ what else is happening:

Weather

A sleepy first-day-back from vacation feel, with gray skies and the occasional drizzle.

Today’ high of 65 will slowly inch its way up as the week goes on, but it still won’ feel like summer just yet.

Patience.

In the News

•wo Long Island Rail Road trains carrying more than 1,000 passengers were stuck under the East River for more than an hour this morning, causing cancellations and delays throughout the rail system. [New York Times]

•aymond Pfeifer, a retired New York City firefighter who spent months digging through debris after Sept. 11 and became a voice for better health care for emergency medical workers, has died. [Associated Press]

•hy have so many women quit on Mayor Bill de Blasio’ team? [New York Times]

•Hurricane Sandy, of all things, has helped make Jersey Shore beaches more accessible. [New York Times]

• Navy parachutist performing a demonstration for Fleet Week plunged into the Hudson River and died after his chute did not open properly. [New York Times]

•uerto Ricans in New York react to the choice of Oscar Lóez Rivera, a militant recently released from prison, as their parade honoree. [New York Times]

•ll-too-familiar problems with the city’ subways have made their way above ground to our newest transit option: ferries. [New York Times]

•ow are New York’ musicians staying “ive”ith shrinking venues and lower pay? [Crain’]

• city employee, who is also president of Manhattan Young Democrats, was arrested and accused of having child pornography on his laptop. [DNAinfo]

•oday’ Metropolitan Diary: “Can’ Get There From Grand Central”

•coreboard: Orioles peck past Yankees, 3-2. Mets empty Brewers, 4-2.

•or a global look at what’ happening, see Your Tuesday Briefing.

Coming Up Today

•he Italian Dance Connection Festival begins with a performance at the Italian American Museum in Little Italy. 6 p.m. [$10 suggested donation]

•alling all romantics! Get relationship advice at Invitation to Love Live, a comedy show at Q.E.D. in Astoria, Queens. 7:30 p.m. [$5]

•Shakespeare in the Park brings “Julius Caesar”o the Delacorte Theater in Central Park. 8 p.m. [Free]

•ooking ahead: Celebrate the 50th anniversary of “gt. Pepper’ Lonely Hearts Club Band” with a Beatles tribute concert on Friday at St. George Theater on Staten Island. [Tickets here]

•…nd the application deadline for the “reenest Block in Brooklyn”ontest is Thursday. You can enter here.

•iberty hosts Sparks, 7 p.m. Yankees at Orioles, 7:05 p.m. (YES). Mets host Brewers, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).

•or more events, see The New York Times’ Arts & Entertainment guide.

•lternate-side parking remains in effect until Wednesday.

And Finally...

It’ (just about) intern season.

In the coming weeks, scores of young adults will pour into the city for stints at temporary summer jobs.

Those of us who have been that summer intern know it can be both exciting and overwhelming. Perhaps this year’ crop could use some words of wisdom from people who know New York City like the back of their hands.

So, New Yorkers, we ask you this: What would you tell incoming summer interns about how to make the most of their time in the city?

Places to go that they might not find in a guidebook? What to do, and, just as important, what not to do? Advice about fitting in, or city-living etiquette for guests?

Share your thoughts by posting in the comments, or send us an email at nytoday@nytimes.com, including your full name, age, neighborhood, and how long you’e lived in New York City.

The New York Today team may contact you for an upcoming column.

New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’ get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.

For updates throughout the day, like us on Facebook.

What would you like to see here to start your day? Post a comment, email us at nytoday@nytimes.com, or reach us via Twitter using #NYToday.

Follow the New York Today columnists, Alexandra Levine and Jonathan Wolfe , on Twitter.

You can find the latest New York Today at nytoday.com.

Children at the National September 11 Memorial & Museum make art to send to Manchester, England, the site of a recent terrorist attack. | Alex Wroblewski for The New York Times | More than half of these women, who were on Mayor de Blasio’ team in 2014, have moved on. | Tony Cenicola/The New York Times | Investigators searched the water around the scene of the parachuting incident on Sunday. | Bryan Anselm for The New York Times 

Document NYTFEED020170530ed5u0028p
